
<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title">INTRODUCTION</h2>

<p>The tales included in this little book of translations are derived
mainly from the "Lays" of Marie de France. I do not profess
them to be a complete collection of her stories in verse.
The ascription varies. Poems which were included in her
work but yesterday are withdrawn to-day, and new matter
suggested by scholars to take the place of the old. I believe
it to be, however, a far fuller version of Marie's "Lays"
than has yet appeared, to my knowledge, in English. Marie's
poems are concerned chiefly with love. To complete my book
I have added two famous mediaeval stories on the same
excellent theme. This, then, may be regarded as a volume
of French romances, dealing, generally, with one aspect of
mediaeval life.</p>

<p>An age so feminist in its sympathies as ours should be
attracted the more easily to Marie de France, because she was
both an artist and a woman. To deliver oneself through any
medium is always difficult. For a woman of the Middle
Ages to express herself publicly by any means whatever was
almost impossible. A great lady, a great Saint or church-woman,
might do so very occasionally. But the individuality
of the ordinary wife was merged in that of her husband, and
for one Abbess of Shrewsbury or Whitby, for one St. Clare or
St. Hilda, there were how many thousand obscure sisters,
who were buried in the daily routine of a life hidden with
Christ in God! Doubtless the artistic temperament burst
out now and again in woman, and would take no denial.
It blew where it listed, appearing in the most unexpected
places. A young nun in a Saxon convent, for instance,
would write little dramas in Latin for the amusement and
edification of the noble maidens under her charge. These
comedies, written in the days of the Emperor Otho, can be
read with pleasure in the reign of King George, by those who
find fragrant the perfumes of the past. They deal with the
pious legends of the Saints, and are regarded with wistful
admiration by the most modern of Parisian playwrights. In
their combination of audacity and simplicity they could only
be performed by Saxon religious in the times of Otho, or by
marionettes in the more self-conscious life of to-day. Or,
again, an Abbess, the protagonist of one of the great love
stories of the world, by sheer force of personality, would
compose letters to one—how immeasurably her moral inferior,
in spite of his genius—expressing with an unexampled
poignancy the most passionate emotions of the heart. Or, to
take my third illustration, here are a woman's poems written
in an age when literature was almost entirely in the hands of
men. Consider the strength of character which alone induced
these three ladies to stray from the beaten paths of
their sex. To the average woman it was enough to be an
object of art herself, or to be the inspiration of masterpieces
by man. But these three women of the Middle Ages—and
such as they—shunned the easier way, and, in their several
spheres, were by deliberate effort, self-conscious artists.</p>

<p>The place and date of birth of Marie de France are unknown—indeed
the very century in which she lived has been
a matter of dispute. Her poems are written in the French of
northern France; but that does not prove her necessarily to
be a Frenchwoman. French was the tongue of the English
Court, and many Englishmen have written in the same
language. Indeed, it is a very excellent vehicle for expression.
Occasionally, Marie would insert English words in her French
text, the better to convey her meaning; but it does not follow
therefrom that the romances were composed in England. It
seems strange that so few positive indications of her race and
home are given in her poems—nothing is contained beyond
her Christian name and the bare statement that she was of
France. She took great pride in her work, which she wrought
to the best of her ability, and was extremely jealous of that
bubble-reputation. Yet whilst this work was an excellent
piece of self-portraiture, it reveals not one single fact or date
on which to go. A consensus of critical opinion presumes
that Marie was a subject of the English Crown, born in an
ancient town called Pitre, some three miles above Rouen, in
the Duchy of Normandy. This speculation is based largely
on the unwonted topographical accuracy of her description
of Pitre, given in "The Lay of the Two Lovers." Such
evidence, perhaps, is insufficient to obtain a judgment in a
Court of Law. The date when Marie lived was long a matter
of dispute. The Prologue to her "Lays" contains a
dedication to some unnamed King; whilst her "Fables" is
dedicated to a certain Count William. These facts prove her
to have been a person of position and repute. The King was
long supposed to be Henry the Third of England, and this
would suggest that she lived in the thirteenth century. An
early scholar, the Abbé de La Rue, in fact, said that this was
"undoubtedly" the case, giving cogent reasons in support of
his contention. But modern scholarship, in the person of
Gaston Paris, has decided that the King was Henry the
Second, of pious memory; the Count, William Longsword,
Earl of Salisbury, his natural son by Fair Rosamund; and
that Marie must be placed in the second half of the twelfth
century. This shows that scholarship is not an exact science,
and that such words as "doubtless" should not be employed
more than necessary. A certain Eastern philosopher, when
engaged in instructing the youth of his country, used always
to conclude his lectures with the unvarying formula, "But,
gentlemen, all that I have told you is probably wrong."
This sage was a wise man (not always the same thing), and
his example should be had in remembrance. It seems
possible (and one hesitates to use a stronger word) that the
"Lays" of Marie were actually written at the Court of
Henry of England. From political ambition the King was
married to Eleanor of Aquitaine, a lady of literary tastes,
who came from a family in which the patronage of singers
was a tradition. Her husband, too, had a pronounced liking
for literature. He was fond of books, and once paid a visit
to Glastonbury to visit King Arthur's tomb. These, perhaps,
are limited virtues, but Henry the Second had need of every
rag. It is somewhat difficult to recognise in that King of
the Prologue, "in whose heart all gracious things are
rooted," the actual King who murdered Becket; who turned
over picture-books at Mass, and never confessed or communicated.
It is yet more difficult to perceive "joy as his
handmaid" who, because of the loss of a favourite city,
threatened to revenge himself on God, by robbing Him of that
thing—<i>i.e.</i>, the soul—He desired most in him; and whose
very last words were an echo of Job's curse upon the day
that he was born. Marie's phrases may be regarded, perhaps,
as a courtly flourish, rather than as conveying truth
with mathematical precision. If not, we should be driven to
suggest an alternative to the favourite simile of lying like an
epitaph. But I think it unlikely that Marie suffered with a
morbidly sensitive conscience. There is little enough real
devotion to be met with in her "Lays"; and if her last
book—a translation from the Latin of the Purgatory of St.
Patrick—is on a subject she avoids in her earlier work, it
was written under the influence of some high prelate, and
may be regarded as a sign that she watched the shadows
cast by the western sun lengthening on the grass.</p>

<p>Gaston Paris suggests 1175 as an approximate date for the composition of
the "Lays" of Marie de France. Their success was immediate and
unequivocal, as indeed was to be expected in the case of a lady situated
so fortunately at Court. We have proof of this in the testimony of Denis
Pyramus, the author who wrote a Life of St. Edmund the King, early in
the following century. He says, in that poem, "And also Dame Marie, who
turned into rhyme and made verses of 'Lays' which are not in the least
true. For these she is much praised, and her rhyme is loved everywhere;
for counts, barons, and knights greatly admire it, and hold it dear. And
they love her writing so much, and take such pleasure in it, that they
have it read, and often copied. These Lays are wont to please ladies,
who listen to them with delight, for they are after their own hearts."
It is no wonder that the lords and ladies of her century were so
enthralled by Marie's romances, for her success was thoroughly well
deserved. Even after seven hundred years her colours remain surprisingly
vivid, and if the tapestry is now a little worn and faded in places, we
still follow with interest the movements of the figures wrought so
graciously upon the arras. Of course her stories are not original; but
was any plot original at any period of the earth's history? This is not
only an old, but an iterative world. The source of Marie's inspiration
is perfectly clear, for she states it emphatically in quite a number of
her Lays. This adventure chanced in Brittany, and in remembrance thereof
the Bretons made a Lay, which I heard sung by the minstrel to the music
of his rote. Marie's part consisted in reshaping this ancient material
in her own rhythmic and coloured words. Scholars tell us that the
essence of her stories is of Celtic rather than of Breton origin. It may
be so; though to the lay mind this is not a matter of great importance
one way or the other; but it seems better to accept a person's definite
statement until it is proved to be false. The Breton or Celtic
imagination had peculiar qualities of dreaminess, and magic and mystery.
Marie's mind was not cast in a precisely similar mould. Occasionally she
is successful enough; but generally she gives the effect of building
with a substance the significance of which she does not completely
realise. She may be likened to a child playing with symbols which, in
the hand of the enchanter, would be of tremendous import. Her treatment
of Isoude, for example, in "The Lay of the Honeysuckle," is quite
perfect in tone, and, indeed, is a little masterpiece in its own
fashion. But her sketch of Guenevere in "The Lay of Sir Launfal" is of a
character that one does not recall with pleasure. To see how Arthur's
Queen might be treated, we have but to turn to the pages of a
contemporary, and learn from Chrestien de Troyes' "Knight of the Cart,"
how an even more considerable poet than Marie could deal with a Celtic
legend. The fact is that Marie's romances derive farther back than any
Breton or Celtic dream. They were so old that they had blown like
thistledown about the four quarters of the world. Her princesses came
really neither from Wales nor Brittany. They were of that stuff from
which romance is shaped. "Her face was bright as the day of union; her
hair dark as the night of separation; and her mouth was magical as
Solomon's seal." You can parallel her "Lays" from folklore, from
classical story and antiquity. Father and son fight together unwittingly
in "The Lay of Milon"; but Rustum had striven with Sohrab long before in
far Persia, and Cuchulain with his child in Ireland. Such stories are
common property. The writer takes his own where he finds it. Marie is
none the less admirable because her stories were narrated by the first
man in Eden; neither are Boccaccio and the Countess D'Aulnoy blameworthy
since they told again what she already had related so well. Marie,
indeed, was an admirable narrator. That was one of her shining virtues.
As a piece of artful tale telling, a specimen of the craft of keeping a
situation in suspense, the arrival of the lady before Arthur's Court, in
"The Lay of Sir Launfal," requires a deal of beating. The justness and
fineness of her sentiment in all that concerns the delicacies of the
human heart are also remarkable. But her true business was that of the
storyteller. In that trade she was almost unapproachable in her day.
There may have been—indeed, there was—a more considerable poet living;
but a more excellent writer of romances, than the author of "Eliduc," it
would have been difficult to find.</p>

<p>The ladies who found the "Lays" of Marie after their
own hearts were not only admirers of beautiful stories; they
had the delicate privilege also of admiring themselves in
their habit as they lived—perhaps even lovelier than in reality—amidst
their accustomed surroundings. The pleasure of a
modern reader in such tales as these is enhanced by the
light they throw on the household arrangements and customs
of the gentlefolk of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. It
may be of interest to consider some of these domestic
arrangements, as illustrated by stories included in the present
volume.</p>

<p>The corporate life of a mediaeval household centered in
the hall. It was office and dining and billiard room, and
was common to gentle and simple alike. The hall was by
far the largest room in the house. It was lighted by
windows, and warmed by an open fire of logs. The smoke
drifted about the roof, escaping finally by the simple means
of a lantern placed immediately above the hearth. A beaten
floor was covered by rushes and fresh hay, or with rugs in
that part affected by the more important members of the
household. The lord himself and his wife sat in chairs upon
a raised daïs. The retainers were seated on benches around
the wall, and before them was spread the dining table—a
mere board upon trestles—which was removed when once
the meal was done. After supper, chess and draughts were
played, or (as we may see in "The Lay of the Thorn")
minstrels sang ballads and the guest contributed to the
general entertainment by the recital of such jests and
adventures as commended themselves to his taste. If the
hall may be considered as the dining room of the mediaeval
home, the garden might almost be looked upon as the
drawing room. You would probably get more real privacy
in the garden than in any other part of the crowded castle,
including the lady's chamber. It is no wonder that we read
of Guenevere taking Launfal aside for a little private conversation
in her pleasaunce. It was not only the most
private, but also the most delightful room in the house—ceiled
with blue and carpeted with green. The garden was
laid out elaborately with a perron and many raised seats.
Trees stood about the lawn in tubs, and there was generally
a fountain playing in the centre, or possibly a pond, stocked
with fish. Fruit trees and flower beds grew thickly about
the garden, and a pleasanter place of perfume and colour and
shade it would be difficult to imagine in the summer heat.
The third room of which we hear continually in these
romances is the lady's chamber. It served the purpose of a
boudoir as well as that of a sleeping room, and consequently
had little real privacy. It contained the marriage chest with
its store of linen, and also the bed. This bed recurs eternally
in mediæval tales. It was used as a seat during the day,
and as a resting-place of nights. It was a magnificent
erection, carved and gilded, and inlaid with ivory. Upon it
was placed a mattress of feathers, and a soft pillow. The
sheets were of linen or silk, and over all was spread a
coverlet of some precious material. An excellent description
of such a couch is given in "The Lay of Gugemar." This
chamber served also as a bath room, and there the bath was
taken, piping hot, in the strange vessel, fashioned somewhat
like a churn, that we see in pictures of the Middle Ages.</p>

<p>Of the dress of the ladies who moved about the castle,
seeing themselves reflected from Marie's pages as in a
polished mirror, I am not competent to speak. The type of
beauty preferred by the old romancers was that of a child's
princess of fairy tale—blue-eyed, golden-haired, and ruddy
of cheek. The lady would wear a shift of linen, "white as
meadow flower." Over this was worn a garment of fur or
silk, according to the season; and, above all, a vividly
coloured gown, all in one line from neck to feet, shapen
closely to the figure, or else the more loosely fitting bliaut.
Her girdle clipped her closely about the waist, falling to the
hem of her skirt, and her feet were shod in soundless shoes,
without heels. The hair was arranged in two long braids,
brought forward over her shoulders; as worn by those
smiling Queens wrought upon the western porch of Chartres
Cathedral. Out of doors, and, indeed, frequently within, as
may be proved by a reference to "The Lay of the Ash Tree,"
the lady was clad in a mantle and a hood. It must have
taken a great deal of time and travail to appear so dainty a
production. But to become poetry for others, it is necessary
for a woman first to be prose to herself.</p>

<p>I am afraid the raw material of this radiant divinity had
much to endure before she suffered her sea change. In
mediaeval illustrations we see the maiden sitting demurely
in company, with downcast eyes, and hands folded modestly
in her lap. This unnatural restraint was induced by the
lavish compulsion of the rod. If there was one text, above
all others, approved and acted upon by fathers and mothers
of the Middle Ages, it was that exhorting parents not to
cocker their child, neither to wink at his follies, but to beat
him on the sides with a stick. Turn to "The Lay of the
Thorn," and mark the gusto with which a mother disciplines
her maid. Parents trained their children with blows.
Husbands (ah, the audacity of the mediaeval husband)
scattered the like seeds of kindness on their wives. In a
book written for the edification of his unmarried daughters,
Chaucer's contemporary, the Knight of La Tour Landry,
tells the following interesting anecdote. A man had a
scolding wife, who railed ungovernably upon him before
strangers, "and he that was angry of her governance smote
her with his first down to the earth; and then with his foot
he struck her on the visage, and broke her nose; and all her
life after that she had her nose crooked, the which shent and
disfigured her visage after, that she might not for shame
show her visage, it was so foul blemished. And this she
had for her evil and great language that she was wont to say
to her husband. And therefore the wife ought to suffer, and
let the husband have the words, and to be master." May
I give yet another illustration before we pass from the
subject. This time it is taken not from a French knight,
but from a sermon of the great Italian preacher, St.
Bernardino of Siena. "There are men who can bear more
patiently with a hen that lays a fresh egg every day than
with their own wives; and sometimes when the hen breaks
a pipkin or a cup he will spare it a beating, simply for love
of the fresh egg which he is unwilling to lose. Oh, raving
madmen! who cannot bear a word from their own wives,
though they bear them such fair fruit; but when the woman
speaks a word more than they like, then they catch up a
stick, and begin to cudgel her; while the hen that cackles
all day, and gives you no rest, you take patience with her
for the sake of her miserable egg—and sometimes she will
break more in your house than she herself is worth, yet
you bear it in patience for the egg's sake. Many fidgetty
fellows, who sometimes see their wives turn out less neat
and dainty than they would like, smite them forthwith; and
meanwhile the hen may make a mess on the table, and you
suffer her. Have patience; it is not right to beat your wife
for every cause, no!"</p>

<p>At the commencement of this Introduction I stated that
Marie's romances are concerned mainly with love. Her
talent was not very wide nor rich, and I have no doubt that
there were facets of her personality which she was unable
to get upon paper. The prettiest girl in the world can only
give what she has to give. By the time any reader reaches
the end of this volume he will be assured that the stories are
stories of love. Probably he will have noticed also that, in
many cases, the lady who inspires the most delicate of
sentiments is, incidentally, a married woman. He may ask
why this was so; and in answer I propose to conclude my
paper with a few observations upon the subject of mediaeval
love.</p>

<p>I doubt in my own mind whether romance writers do not
exaggerate what was certainly a characteristic of the Middle
Ages. To be ordinary is to be uninteresting; and it is
obvious that the stranger the experience, the more likely is
it to attract the interest and attention of the hearer. Blessed
is the person—as well as the country—who has no history.
But it was really very difficult for the twelfth century poet
to write a love story, with a maiden as the central figure.
The noble maiden seldom had a love story. It is true enough
that she was sometimes referred to in the choice of her
husband: two young ladies in "A Story of Beyond the
Sea" are both consulted in the matter. As a rule, however,
her inclination was not permitted to stand in the way of the
interests of her parents or guardians. She was betrothed
in childhood, and married very young, for mercenary or
political reasons, to a husband much older than herself. We
read of a girl of twelve being married to a man of fifty.
There was no great opportunity for a love story here; and
the strange entreaty, on the part of the nameless French
poet, to love the maidens for the sake of Christ's love,
passed over the heads of the romance writers. Not that the
mediæval maidens showed any shrinking from matrimony.
"Fair daughter, I have given you a husband." "Blessed
be God," said the damsel. There spoke a contented spirit.
Things have changed, and we can but sigh after the good
old times.</p>

<p>But the maiden inevitably became the wife, and the
whirligig of Time brought in his revenges. The lady now
found herself the most important member of her sex, in a
dwelling filled with men. She had few women about her
person, and the confidant of a great dame in old romance
is, frequently enough, her chamberlain. These young men
had no chance of marriage, and naturally strove to gain the
attention of a lady, whose favour was to them so important
a matter. A mediæval knight was the sworn champion of
God and the ladies—but more especially the latter. The
chatelaine, herself, found time hang heavily on her hands.
Amusements were few; books limited in number; a husband
not of absorbing interest; so she turned to such distractions
as presented themselves. The prettier a lady, the sweeter
the incense and flattery swung beneath her nose; for this
was one of the disadvantages of marrying an attractive
woman. "It is hard to keep a wife whom everyone admires;
and if no one admires her it is hard to have to live with her
yourself." One of these distractions took the shape of
Courts of Love, where the bored but literary chatelaine
discussed delicate problems of conduct pertaining to the
heart. The minstrel about the lady's castle, for his part,
sought her favourable notice not only by his songs but also
by giving an object lesson of his melancholy condition. One
would imagine that his proceedings were not always
calculated to further their purpose. A famous singer, for
instance, in honour of a lady who was named Lupa, caused
himself to be sewn in a wolf's skin, and ran before the
hounds till he was pulled down, half dead. Another great
minstrel and lover bought a leper's gown and bowl and
clapper from some afflicted wretch. He mutilated his forefinger,
and sat before his lady's door, in the company of a
piteous crowd of sick and maimed, to await her alms. No
doubt he trusted that his devotion would procure him a
different kind of charity. From such discussions as these,
and from conduct such as this, a type of love came into being
which was peculiar to the period. Since the lovers were
not bound in the sweet and common union of children and
home, since on the side of the lady all was of grace and
nought of debt, they searched out other bands to unite them
together. These they found in a system of devotion, silence
and faithfulness, which added a dignity to their relations.
These virtues they took so seriously that we find the
Chatelaine of Vergi dying because she believed her lover to
have betrayed her trust. The mediaeval romancer contemplated
such unions with joy and pity; but for all their
virtues we must not deceive ourselves with words. Such
honour was rooted in dishonour, and the measure of their
guilt was that they debased the moral currency. Presently the
greatest of all the poets of the Middle Ages would arise, to teach
a different fashion of devotion. His was a love that sought no
communion with its object, neither speech nor embrace. It
was sufficient for Dante to contemplate Beatrice from afar,
as one might kneel before the picture of a saint. I do not
say that a love like this—so spiritual and so aloof—will ever
be possible to men. It did not suffice even to Dante, for all
his tremendous moral muscle. Human love must always
and inevitably be founded on a physical basis. But the
burning drop of idealism that Dante contributed to the
passion of the Middle Ages has made possible the love of
which we now and again catch a glimpse in the union of
select natures. And that the seed of such flowering may be
carried about the world is one of the fairest hopes and
possibilities of the human race.</p>

<p>EUGENE MASON.</p>

<p>The originals of these narratives are to be found in
Roquefort's edition of the Poésies de Marie de France; in a
volume of the Nouvelles Françoises en Prose, edited by
Moland and D'Héricault; and in M. Gaston Raynaud's text
of La Chatelaine de Vergi.</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title">PROLOGUE</h2>

<p>BY WAY OF DEDICATION</p>

<p>Those to whom God has given the gift of comely speech,
should not hide their light beneath a bushel, but should
willingly show it abroad. If a great truth is proclaimed
in the ears of men, it brings forth fruit a hundred-fold;
but when the sweetness of the telling is praised of many,
flowers mingle with the fruit upon the branch.</p>

<p>According to the witness of Priscian, it was the custom
of ancient writers to express obscurely some portions
of their books, so that those who came after might
study with greater diligence to find the thought within
their words. The philosophers knew this well, and were
the more unwearied in labour, the more subtle in distinctions,
so that the truth might make them free.
They were persuaded that he who would keep himself
unspotted from the world should search for knowledge,
that he might understand. To set evil from me, and to
put away my grief, I purposed to commence a book.
I considered within myself what fair story in the Latin
or Romance I could turn into the common tongue.
But I found that all the stories had been written, and
scarcely it seemed the worth my doing, what so many
had already done. Then I called to mind those Lays
I had so often heard. I doubted nothing—for well I
know—that our fathers fashioned them, that men
should bear in remembrance the deeds of those who
have gone before. Many a one, on many a day, the
minstrel has chanted to my ear. I would not that they
should perish, forgotten, by the roadside. In my turn,
therefore, I have made of them a song, rhymed as well
as I am able, and often has their shaping kept me sleepless
in my bed.</p>

<p>In your honour, most noble and courteous King, to
whom joy is a handmaid, and in whose heart all gracious
things are rooted, I have brought together these Lays,
and told my tales in seemly rhyme. Ere they speak
for me, let me speak with my own mouth, and say,
"Sire, I offer you these verses. If you are pleased to
receive them, the fairer happiness will be mine, and the
more lightly I shall go all the days of my life. Do not
deem that I think more highly of myself than I ought
to think, since I presume to proffer this, my gift."
Hearken now to the commencement of the matter.</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title">THE LAY OF GUGEMAR</h2>

<p>Hearken, oh gentles, to the words of Marie. When
the minstrel tells his tale, let the folk about the fire heed
him willingly. For his part the singer must be wary
not to spoil good music with unseemly words. Listen,
oh lordlings, to the words of Marie, for she pains herself
grievously not to forget this thing. The craft is hard—then
approve the more sweetly him who carols the tune.
But this is the way of the world, that when a man or
woman sings more tunably than his fellows, those about
the fire fall upon him, pell-mell, for reason of their
envy. They rehearse diligently the faults of his song,
and steal away his praise with evil words. I will brand
these folk as they deserve. They, and such as they, are
like mad dogs—cowardly and felon—who traitorously
bring to death men better than themselves. Now let the
japer, and the smiler with his knife, do me what harm
they may. Verily they are in their right to speak ill of
me.</p>

<p>Hearken, oh gentles, to the tale I set before you, for
thereof the Bretons already have made a Lay. I will
not do it harm by many words, and here is the commencement
of the matter. According to text and
scripture, now I relate a certain adventure, which
bechanced in the realm of Brittany, in days long gone
before.</p>

<p>In that time when Arthur maintained his realm, the
now in peace, the now in war, the King counted amongst
his vassals a certain baron, named Oridial. This
knight was lord of Leon, and was very near to his
prince's heart, both in council chamber and in field.
From his wife he had gotten two children, the one a son
and the other a fair daughter. Nogent, he had called
the damsel at the font, and the dansellon was named
Gugemar—no goodlier might be found in any realm.
His mother had set all her love upon the lad, and his
father shewed him every good that he was able. When
the varlet was no more a child, Oridial sent him to
the King, to be trained as a page in the courtesies of
the Court. Right serviceable was he in his station, and
meetly praised of all. The term of his service having
come, and he being found of fitting years and knowledge,
the King made him knight with his own hand, and
armed him in rich harness, according to his wish. So
Gugemar gave gifts to all those about his person, and
bidding farewell, took leave, and departed from the Court.
Gugemar went his way to Flanders, being desirous of advancement,
for in that kingdom ever they have strife
and war. Neither in Loraine nor Burgundy, Anjou nor
Gascony, might be found in that day a better knight
than he, no, nor one his peer. He had but one fault,
since of love he took no care. There was neither dame
nor maiden beneath the sky, however dainty and kind,
to whom he gave thought or heed, though had he
required her love of any damsel, very willingly would she
have granted his desire. Many there were who prayed him
for his love, but might have no kiss in return. So seeing
that he refrained his heart in this fashion, men deemed
him a strange man, and one fallen into a perilous case.</p>

<p>In the flower of his deeds the good knight returned
to his own land, that he might see again his father
and lord, his mother and his sister, even as he very
tenderly desired. He lodged with them for the space
of a long month, and at the end of that time had envy
to hunt within the wood. The night being come,
Gugemar summoned his prickers and his squires, and
early in the morning rode within the forest. Great
pleasure had Gugemar in the woodland, and much he
delighted in the chase. A tall stag was presently started,
and the hounds being uncoupled, all hastened in pursuit—the
huntsmen before, and the good knight following
after, winding upon his horn. Gugemar rode at a great
pace after the quarry, a varlet riding beside, bearing his
bow, his arrows and his spear. He followed so hotly
that he over-passed the chase. Gazing about him
he marked, within a thicket, a doe hiding with her
fawn. Very white and wonderful was this beast, for she
was without spot, and bore antlers upon her head. The
hounds bayed about her, but might not pull her down.
Gugemar bent his bow, and loosed a shaft at the quarry.
He wounded the deer a little above the hoof, so that
presently she fell upon her side. But the arrow glanced
away, and returning upon itself, struck Gugemar
in the thigh, so grievously, that straightway he fell from
his horse upon the ground. Gugemar lay upon the grass,
beside the deer which he had wounded to his hurt.
He heard her sighs and groans, and perceived the
bitterness of her pity. Then with mortal speech the doe
spake to the wounded man in such fashion as this,
"Alas, my sorrow, for now am I slain. But thou,
Vassal, who hast done me this great wrong, do not think
to hide from the vengeance of thy destiny. Never may
surgeon and his medicine heal your hurt. Neither herb
nor root nor potion can ever cure the wound within your
flesh: For that there is no healing. The only balm to
close that sore must be brought by a woman, who for her
love will suffer such pain and sorrow as no woman
in the world has endured before. And to the dolorous
lady, dolorous knight. For your part you shall do and
suffer so great things for her, that not a lover beneath
the sun, or lovers who are dead, or lovers who yet shall
have their day, but shall marvel at the tale. Now, go
from hence, and let me die in peace."</p>

<p>Gugemar was wounded twice over—by the arrow, and
by the words he was dismayed to hear. He considered
within himself to what land he must go to find this
healing for his hurt, for he was yet too young to die. He
saw clearly, and told it to his heart, that there was no
lady in his life to whom he could run for pity, and
be made whole of his wound. He called his varlet
before him,</p>

<p>"Friend," said he, "go forthwith, and bring my comrades
to this place, for I have to speak with them."</p>

<p>The varlet went upon his errand, leaving his master
sick with the heat and fever of his hurt. When he was
gone, Gugemar tore the hem from his shirt, and bound
it straitly about his wound. He climbed painfully
upon the saddle, and departed without more ado, for he
was with child to be gone before any could come to stay
him from his purpose. A green path led through
the deep forest to the plain, and his way across the
plain brought him to a cliff, exceeding high, and to the sea.
Gugemar looked upon the water, which was very still, for
this fair harbourage was land-locked from the main.
Upon this harbour lay one only vessel, bearing a rich
pavilion of silk, daintily furnished both without and
within, and well it seemed to Gugemar that he had seen
this ship before. Beneath the sky was no ship so rich
or precious, for there was not a sail but was spun of silk,
and not a plank, from keel to mast, but showed of ebony.
Too fair was the nave for mortal man, and Gugemar held
it in sore displeasure. He marvelled greatly from
what country it had come, and wondered long concerning
this harbour, and the ship that lay therein. Gugemar
got him down from his horse upon the shore, and with
mighty pain and labour climbed within the ship. He
trusted to find merchantmen and sailors therein, but
there was none to guard, and none he saw. Now within
the pavilion was a very rich bed, carved by cunning
workmen in the days of King Solomon. This fair bed
was wrought of cypress wood and white ivory, adorned
with gold and gems most precious. Right sweet were the
linen cloths upon the bed, and so soft the pillow, that
he who lay thereon would sleep, were he sadder than any
other in the world. The counterpane was of purple from
the vats of Alexandria, and over all was set a right fair
coverlet of cloth of gold. The pavilion was litten by two
great waxen torches, placed in candlesticks of fine gold,
decked with jewels worth a lord's ransom. So the
wounded knight looked on ship and pavilion, bed and
candle, and marvelled greatly. Gugemar sat him down
upon the bed for a little, because of the anguish of his
wound. After he had rested a space he got upon his feet,
that he might quit the vessel, but he found that for him
there was no return. A gentle wind had filled the
sails, and already he was in the open sea. When
Gugemar saw that he was far from land, he was very
heavy and sorrowful. He knew not what to do, by
reason of the mightiness of his hurt. But he must
endure the adventure as best he was able; so he prayed
to God to take him in His keeping, and in His good pleasure
to bring him safe to port, and deliver him from the peril of
death. Then climbing upon the couch, he laid his
head upon the pillow, and slept as one dead, until, with
vespers, the ship drew to that haven where he might find
the healing for his hurt.</p>

<p>Gugemar had come to an ancient city, where the
King of that realm held his court and state. This King
was full of years, and was wedded to a dame of high
degree. The lady was of tender age, passing fresh
and fair, and sweet of speech to all. Therefore was the
King jealous of his wife beyond all measure. Such is the
wont of age, for much it fears that old and young cannot
mate together, and that youth will turn to youth. This
is the death in life of the old.</p>

<p>The castle of this ancient lord had a mighty keep.
Beneath this tower was a right fair orchard, together
with a close, shut in by a wall of green marble, very
strong and high. This wall had one only gate, and the
door was watched of warders, both night and day. On
the other side of this garden was the sea, so that none
might do his errand in the castle therefrom, save in a
boat. To hold his dame in the greater surety, the
King had built a bower within the wall; there was no
fairer chamber beneath the sun. The first room was
the Queen's chapel. Beyond this was the lady's bedchamber,
painted all over with shapes and colours
most wonderful to behold. On one wall might be seen
Dame Venus, the goddess of Love, sweetly flushed as
when she walked the water, lovely as life, teaching men
how they should bear them in loyal service to their
lady. On another wall, the goddess threw Ovid's book
within a fire of coals. A scroll issuing from her lips
proclaimed that those who read therein, and strove to
ease them of their pains, would find from her neither
service nor favour. In this chamber the lady was put
in ward, and with her a certain maiden to hold her
company. This damsel was her niece, since she was her
sister's child, and there was great love betwixt the twain.
When the Queen walked within the garden, or went
abroad, this maiden was ever by her side, and came
again with her to the house. Save this damsel, neither
man nor woman entered in the bower, nor issued forth
from out the wall. One only man possessed the key of
the postern, an aged priest, very white and frail. This
priest recited the service of God within the chapel, and
served the Queen's plate and cup when she ate meat
at table.</p>

<p>Now, on a day, the Queen had fallen asleep after meat,
and on her awaking would walk a little in the garden.
She called her companion to her, and the two went
forth to be glad amongst the flowers. As they looked
across the sea they marked a ship drawing near the land,
rising and falling upon the waves. Very fearful was the
Queen thereat, for the vessel came to anchorage, though
there was no helmsman to direct her course. The dame's
face became sanguine for dread, and she turned her
about to flee, because of her exceeding fear. Her maiden,
who was of more courage than she, stayed her mistress
with many comforting words. For her part she was very
desirous to know what this thing meant. She hastened
to the shore, and laying aside her mantle, climbed
within this wondrous vessel. Thereon she found no
living soul, save only the knight sleeping fast within
the pavilion. The damsel looked long upon the knight,
for pale he was as wax, and well she deemed him dead.
She returned forthwith to the Queen, and told her of
this marvel, and of the good knight who was slain.</p>

<p>"Let us go together on the ship," replied the lady.
"If he be dead we may give him fitting burial, and the
priest shall pray meetly for his soul. Should he be yet
alive perchance he will speak, and tell us of his case."</p>

<p>Without more tarrying the two damsels mounted
on the ship, the lady before, and her maiden following
after. When the Queen entered in the pavilion she
stayed her feet before the bed, for joy and grief of what
she saw. She might not refrain her eyes from gazing
on the knight, for her heart was ravished with his beauty,
and she sorrowed beyond measure, because of his grievous
hurt. To herself she said, "In a bad hour cometh the
goodly youth." She drew near the bed, and placing
her hand upon his breast, found that the flesh was warm,
and that the heart beat strongly in his side. Gugemar
awoke at the touch, and saluted the dame as sweetly
as he was able, for well he knew that he had come to
a Christian land. The lady, full of thought, returned
him his salutation right courteously, though the tears
were yet in her eyes. Straightway she asked of him
from what realm he came, and of what people, and in
what war he had taken his hurt.</p>

<p>"Lady," answered Gugemar, "in no battle I received
this wound. If it pleases you to hear my tale I will
tell you the truth, and in nothing will I lie. I am a
knight of Little Brittany. Yesterday I chased a wonderful
white deer within the forest. The shaft with which
I struck her to my hurt, returned again on me,
and caused this wound upon my thigh, which may never
be searched, nor made whole. For this wondrous
Beast raised her plaint in a mortal tongue. She cursed
me loudly, with many evil words, swearing that never
might this sore be healed, save by one only damsel in
the world, and her I know not where to find. When I
heard my luckless fate I left the wood with what speed
I might, and coming to a harbour, not far from thence,
I lighted on this ship. For my sins I climbed therein.
Then without oars or helm this boat ravished me from
shore; so that I know not where I have come, nor
what is the name of this city. Fair lady, for God's love,
counsel me of your good grace, for I know not where to
turn, nor how to govern the ship."</p>

<p>The lady made answer,
"Fair sir, willingly shall I give you such good counsel
as I may. This realm and city are the appanage of my
husband. He is a right rich lord, of high lineage, but
old and very full of years. Also he is jealous beyond
all measure; therefore it is that I see you now. By
reason of his jealousy he has shut me fast between
high walls, entered by one narrow door, with an ancient
priest to keep the key. May God requite him for his
deed. Night and day I am guarded in this prison,
from whence I may never go forth, without the knowledge
of my lord. Here are my chamber and my chapel, and
here I live, with this, my maiden, to bear me company.
If it pleases you to dwell here for a little, till you may
pass upon your way, right gladly we shall receive you,
and with a good heart we will tend your wound, till
you are healed."</p>

<p>When Gugemar heard this speech he rejoiced greatly.
He thanked the lady with many sweet words, and
consented to sojourn in her hall awhile. He raised himself
upon his couch, and by the courtesy of the damsels left
the ship. Leaning heavily upon the lady, at the end
he won to her maiden's chamber, where there was a
fair bed covered with a rich dossal of broidered silk,
edged with fur. When he was entered in this bed, the
damsels came bearing clear water in basins of gold,
for the cleansing of his hurt. They stanched the blood
with a towel of fine linen, and bound the wound strictly,
to his exceeding comfort. So after the vesper meal was
eaten, the lady departed to her own chamber, leaving
the knight in much ease and content.</p>

<p>Now Gugemar set his love so fondly upon the lady
that he forgot his father's house. He thought no more
of the anguish of his hurt, because of another wound
that was beneath his breast. He tossed and sighed in
his unrest, and prayed the maiden of his service to depart,
so that he might sleep a little. When the maid was gone,
Gugemar considered within himself whether he might
seek the dame, to know whether her heart was warmed
by any ember of the flame that burned in his. He turned
it this way and that, and knew not what to do. This
only was clear, that if the lady refused to search his
wound, death, for him, was sure and speedy.</p>

<p>"Alas," said he, "what shall I do! Shall I go to my
lady, and pray her pity on the wretch who has none
to give him counsel? If she refuse my prayer, because
of her hardness and pride, I shall know there is nought
for me but to die in my sorrow, or, at least, to go heavily
all the days of my life."</p>

<p>Then he sighed, and in his sighing lighted on a better
purpose; for he said within himself that doubtless
he was born to suffer, and that the best of him was tears.
All the long night he spent in vigil and groanings and
watchfulness. To himself he told over her words and
her semblance. He remembered the eyes and the fair
mouth of his lady, and all the grace and the sweetness,
which had struck like a knife at his heart. Between
his teeth he cried on her for pity, and for a little more
would have called her to his side. Ah, had he but
known the fever of the lady, and how terrible a lord
to her was Love, how great had been his joy and solace.
His visage would have been the more sanguine, which
was now so pale of colour, because of the dolour that
was his. But if the knight was sick by reason of his
love, the dame had small cause to boast herself of
health. The lady rose early from her bed, since she
might not sleep. She complained of her unrest, and of
Love who rode her so hardly. The maiden, who was
of her company, saw clearly enough that all her lady's
thoughts were set upon the knight, who, for his healing,
sojourned in the chamber. She did not know whether his
thoughts were given again to the dame. When, therefore,
the lady had entered in the chapel, the damsel went
straightway to the knight. He welcomed her gladly,
and bade her be seated near the bed. Then he inquired,
"Friend, where now is my lady, and why did she
rise so early from her bed?"</p>

<p>Having spoken so far, he became silent, and sighed.</p>

<p>"Sir," replied the maiden softly, "you love, and are
discreet, but be not too discreet therein. In such a
love as yours there is nothing to be ashamed. He who
may win my lady's favour has every reason to be proud
of his fortune. Altogether seemly would be your
friendship, for you are young, and she is fair."</p>

<p>The knight made answer to the maiden,
"I am so fast in the snare, that I pray the fowler
to slay me, if she may not free me from the net. Counsel
me, fair sweet friend, if I may hope of kindness at her
hand."</p>

<p>Then the maiden of her sweetness comforted the knight,
and assured him of all the good that she was able. So
courteous and debonair was the maid.</p>

<p>When the lady had heard Mass, she hastened back
to the chamber. She had not forgotten her friend,
and greatly she desired to know whether he was awake
or asleep, of whom her heart was fain. She bade her
maiden to summon him to her chamber, for she had a
certain thing in her heart to show him at leisure, were
it for the joy or the sorrow of their days.</p>

<p>Gugemar saluted the lady, and the dame returned
the knight his courtesy, but their hearts were too
fearful for speech. The knight dared ask nothing of
his lady, for reason that he was a stranger in a strange
land, and was adread to show her his love. But—as
says the proverb—he who will not tell of his sore, may
not hope for balm to his hurt. Love is a privy wound
within the heart, and none knoweth of that bitterness
but the heart alone. Love is an evil which may last
for a whole life long, because of man and his constant
heart. Many there be who make of Love a gibe and a
jest, and with specious words defame him by boastful
tales. But theirs is not love. Rather it is folly and
lightness, and the tune of a merry song. But let him
who has found a constant lover prize her above rubies,
and serve her with loyal service, being altogether at
her will. Gugemar loved in this fashion, and therefore
Love came swiftly to his aid. Love put words in his
mouth, and courage in his heart, so that his hope might
be made plain.</p>

<p>"Lady," said he, "I die for your love. I am in fever
because of my wound, and if you care not to heal my
hurt I would rather die. Fair friend, I pray you for
grace. Do not gainsay me with evil words."</p>

<p>The lady hearkened with a smile to Gugemar's
speech. Right daintily and sweetly she replied,
"Friend, yea is not a word of two letters. I do not
grant such a prayer every day of the week, and must
you have your gift so quickly?"</p>

<p>"Lady," cried he, "for God's sake pity me, and take
it not amiss. She, who loves lightly, may make her
lover pray for long, so that she may hide how often her
feet have trodden the pathway with another friend.
But the honest dame, when she has once given her heart
to a friend, will not deny his wish because of pride.
The rather she will find her pride in humbleness, and
love him again with the same love he has set on her.
So they will be glad together, and since none will have
knowledge or hearing of the matter, they will rejoice
in their youth. Fair, sweet lady, be this thy pleasure?"</p>

<p>When the lady heard these words well she found them
honest and true. Therefore without further prayings
and ado she granted Gugemar her love and her kiss.
Henceforward Gugemar lived greatly at his ease, for
he had sight and speech of his friend, and many a time
she granted him her embrace and tenderness, as is the
wont of lovers when alone.</p>

<p>For a year and a half Gugemar dwelt with his lady,
in solace and great delight. Then Fortune turned her
wheel, and in a trice cast those down, whose seat had
been so high. Thus it chanced to them, for they were
spied upon and seen.</p>

<p>On a morning in summer time the Queen and the
damoiseau sat fondly together. The knight embraced
her, eyes and face, but the lady stayed him, saying,
"Fair sweet friend, my heart tells me that I shall
lose you soon, for this hidden thing will quickly be made
clear. If you are slain, may the same sword kill me.
But if you win forth, well I know that you will find
another love, and that I shall be left alone with my
thoughts. Were I parted from you, may God give me
neither joy, nor rest, nor peace, if I would seek another
friend. Of that you need have no fear. Friend, for surety
and comfort of my heart deliver me now some sark
of thine. Therein I will set a knot, and make this
covenant with you, that never will you put your love
on dame or maiden, save only on her who shall first
unfasten this knot. Then you will ever keep faith with
me, for so cunning shall be my craft, that no woman
may hope to unravel that coil, either by force or guile,
or even with her knife."</p>

<p>So the knight rendered the sark to his lady, and made
such bargain as she wished, for the peace and assurance
of her mind.</p>

<p>For his part the knight took a fair girdle, and girt
it closely about the lady's middle. Right secret was the
clasp and buckle of this girdle. Therefore he required
of the dame that she would never grant her love, save
to him only, who might free her from the strictness of
this bond, without injury to band or clasp. Then they
kissed together, and entered into such covenant as you
have heard.</p>

<p>That very day their hidden love was made plain to
men. A certain chamberlain was sent by that ancient
lord with a message to the Queen. This unlucky wretch,
finding that in no wise could he enter within the chamber,
looked through the window, and saw. Forthwith he
hastened to the King, and told him that which he had
seen. When the agèd lord understood these words,
never was there a sadder man than he. He called
together the most trusty sergeants of his guard, and
coming with them to the Queen's chamber, bade them
to thrust in the door. When Gugemar was found therein,
the King commanded that he should be slain with the
sword, by reason of the anguish that was his. Gugemar
was in no whit dismayed by the threat. He started to
his feet, and gazing round, marked a stout rod of fir,
on which it is the use for linen to be hung. This he
took in hand, and faced his foes, bidding them have a
care, for he would do a mischief to them all. The King
looked earnestly upon the fearless knight, inquiring
of him who he was, and where he was born, and in what
manner he came to dwell within his house. So Gugemar
told over to him this story of his fate. He showed him
of the Beast that he had wounded to his hurt; of the
nave, and of his bitter wound; of how he came within
the realm, and of the lady's surgery. He told all to
the ancient lord, to the last moment when he stood within
his power. The King replied that he gave no credence
to his word, nor believed that the story ran as he had
said. If, however, the vessel might be found, he would
commit the knight again to the waves. He would go
the more heavily for the knight's saining, and a
glad day would it be if he made shipwreck at sea.
When they had entered into this covenant together,
they went forth to the harbour, and there discovered
the barge, even as Gugemar had said. So they set
him thereon, and prayed him to return unto his own
realm.</p>

<p>Without sail or oar the ship parted from that coast,
with no further tarrying. The knight wept and wrung
his hands, complaining of his lady's loss, and of her
cherishing. He prayed the mighty God to grant him
speedy death, and never to bring him home, save to
meet again with her who was more desirable than life.
Whilst he was yet at his orisons, the ship drew again
to that port, from whence she had first come. Gugemar
made haste to get him from the vessel, so that he
might the more swiftly return to his own land. He
had gone but a little way when he was aware of a
squire of his household, riding in the company of a certain
knight. This squire held the bridle of a destrier in his
hand, though no man rode thereon. Gugemar called
to him by name, so that the varlet looking upon him,
knew again his lord. He got him to his feet, and bringing
the destrier to his master, set the knight thereon. Great
was the joy, and merry was the feast, when Gugemar
returned to his own realm. But though his friends did
all that they were able, neither song nor game could
cheer the knight, nor turn him from dwelling in his
unhappy thoughts. For peace of mind they urged that
he took to himself a wife, but Gugemar would have
none of their counsel. Never would he wed a wife, on
any day, either for love or for wealth, save only that
she might first unloose the knot within his shirt. When
this news was noised about the country, there was neither
dame nor damsel in the realm of Brittany, but essayed
to unfasten the knot. But there was no lady who could
gain to her wish, whether by force or guile.</p>

<p>Now will I show of that lady, whom Gugemar so
fondly loved. By the counsel of a certain baron the
ancient King set his wife in prison. She was shut fast
in a tower of grey marble, where her days were bad,
and her nights worse. No man could make clear to you
the great pain, the anguish and the dolour, that she
suffered in this tower, wherein, I protest, she died daily.
Two years and more she lay bound in prison, where
warders came, but never joy or delight. Often she
thought upon her friend.</p>

<p>"Gugemar, dear lord, in an evil hour I saw you with
my eyes. Better for me that I die quickly, than endure
longer my evil lot. Fair friend, if I could but win to
that coast whence you sailed, very swiftly would I
fling myself in the sea, and end my wretched life."
When she had said these words she rose to her feet,
and coming to the door was amazed to find therein
neither bolt nor key. She issued forth, without challenge
from sergeant or warder, and hastening to the harbour,
found there her lover's ship, made fast to that very
rock, from which she would cast her down. When she
saw the barge she climbed thereon, but presently
bethought her that on this nave her friend had gone
to perish in the sea. At this thought she would have
fled again to the shore, but her bones were as water, and
she fell upon the deck. So in sore travail and sorrow,
the vessel carried her across the waves, to a port of
Brittany, guarded by a castle, strong and very fair.
Now the lord of this castle was named Meriadus. He
was a right warlike prince, and had made him ready to
fight with the prince of a country near by. He had
risen very early in the morning, to send forth a great
company of spears, the more easily to ravage this
neighbour's realm. Meriadus looked forth from his
window, and marked the ship which came to port.
He hastened down the steps of the perron, and calling to
his chamberlain, came with what speed he might to
the nave. Then mounting the ladder he stood upon
the deck. When Meriadus found within the ship a
dame, who for beauty seemed rather a fay than a mere
earthly woman, he seized her by her mantle, and brought
her swiftly to his keep. Right joyous was he because
of his good fortune, for lovely was the lady beyond
mortal measure. He made no question as to who had
set her on the barge. He knew only that she was fair,
and of high lineage, and that his heart turned towards
her with so hot a love as never before had he put on
dame or damsel. Now there dwelt within the castle
a sister of this lord, who was yet unwed. Meriadus
bestowed the lady in his sister's chamber, because it
was the fairest in the tower. Moreover he commanded
that she should be meetly served, and held in all reverence.
But though the dame was so richly clothed and
cherished, ever was she sad and deep in thought.
Meriadus came often to cheer her with mirth and speech,
by reason that he wished to gain her love as a free gift,
and not by force. It was in vain that he prayed her for
grace, since she had no balm for his wound. For answer
she showed him the girdle about her body, saying that
never would she give her love to man, save only to him
who might unloose the buckle of that girdle, without
harm to belt or clasp. When Meriadus heard these
words, he spoke in haste and said,</p>

<p>"Lady, there dwells in this country a very worthy
knight, who will take no woman as wife, except she
first untie a certain crafty knot in the hem of a shirt,
and that without force or knife. For a little I would
wager that it was you who tied this knot."</p>

<p>When the lady heard thereof her breath went from
her, and near she came to falling on the ground.
Meriadus caught her in his arms, and cut the laces of
her bodice, that she might have the more air. He
strove to unfasten her girdle, but might not dissever the
clasp. Yea, though every knight in the realm essayed
to unfasten that cincture, it would not yield, except
to one alone.</p>

<p>Now Meriadus made the lists ready for a great
jousting, and called to that tournament all the knights
who would aid him in his war. Many a lord came at his
bidding, and with them Gugemar, amongst the first.
Meriadus had sent letters to the knight, beseeching
him, as friend and companion, not to fail him in this
business. So Gugemar hastened to the need of his
lord, and at his back more than one hundred spears.
All these Meriadus welcomed very gladly, and gave
them lodging within his tower. In honour of his guest,
the prince sent two gentlemen to his sister, praying
her to attire herself richly, and come to hall, together
with the dame whom he loved so dearly well. These
did as they were bidden, and arrayed in their sweetest
vesture, presently entered in the hall, holding each other
by the hand. Very pale and pensive was the lady, but
when she heard her lover's name her feet failed beneath
her, and had not the maiden held her fast, she would
have fallen on the floor. Gugemar rose from his seat
at the sight of the dame, her fashion and her semblance,
and stood staring upon her. He went a little apart,
and said within himself,
"Can this be my sweet friend, my hope, my heart,
my life, the fair lady who gave me the grace of her love?
From whence comes she; who might have brought her
to this far land? But I speak in my folly, for well I
know that this is not my dear. A little red, a little
white, and all women are thus shapen. My thoughts
are troubled, by reason that the sweetness of this lady
resembles the sweetness of that other, for whom my heart
sighs and trembles. Yet needs must that I have speech
of the lady."</p>

<p>Gugemar drew near to the dame. He kissed her
courteously, and found no word to utter, save to pray
that he might be seated at her side. Meriadus spied
upon them closely, and was the more heavy because
of their trouble. Therefore he feigned mirth.</p>

<p>"Gugemar, dear lord, if it pleases you, let this damsel
essay to untie the knot of your sark, if so be she may
loosen the coil."</p>

<p>Gugemar made answer that very willingly he would
do this thing. He called to him a squire who had the
shirt in keeping, and bade him seek his charge, and
deliver it to the dame. The lady took the sark in hand.
Well she knew the knot that she had tied so cunningly,
and was so willing to unloose; but for reason of the
trouble at her heart, she did not dare essay. Meriadus
marked the distress of the damsel, and was more
sorrowful than ever was lover before.</p>

<p>"Lady," said he, "do all that you are able to unfasten
this coil."</p>

<p>So at his commandment she took again to her the
hem of the shirt, and lightly and easily unravelled the
tie.</p>

<p>Gugemar marvelled greatly when he saw this thing.
His heart told him that of a truth this was his lady,
but he could not give faith to his eyes.</p>

<p>"Friend, are you indeed the sweet comrade I have
known? Tell me truly now, is there about your body
the girdle with which I girt you in your own realm?"</p>

<p>He set his hands to her waist, and found that the
secret belt was yet about her sides.</p>
<br/>

<p>"Fair sweet friend, tell me now by what adventure
I find you here, and who has brought you to this tower?"</p>

<p>So the lady told over to her friend the pain and the
anguish and the dolour of the prison in which she was
held; of how it chanced that she fled from her dungeon,
and lighting upon a ship, entered therein, and came
to this fair haven; of how Meriadus took her from the
barge, but kept her in all honour, save only that ever
he sought for her love; "but now, fair friend, all is well,
for you hold your lady in your arms."</p>

<p>Gugemar stood upon his feet, and beckoned with his
hand.</p>

<p>"Lords," he cried, "hearken now to me. I have
found my friend, whom I have lost for a great while.
Before you all I pray and require of Meriadus to yield
me my own. For this grace I give him open thanks.
Moreover I will kneel down, and become his liege man.
For two years, or three, if he will, I will bargain to serve
in his quarrels, and with me, of riders, a hundred or
more at my back."</p>

<p>Then answered Meriadus,
"Gugemar, fair friend, I am not yet so shaken or
overborne in war, that I must do as you wish, right
humbly. This woman is my captive. I found her:
I hold her: and I will defend my right against you
and all your power."</p>

<p>When Gugemar heard these proud words he got to
horse speedily, him and all his company. He threw
down his glove, and parted in anger from the tower. But
he went right heavily, since he must leave behind his
friend. In his train rode all those knights who had drawn
together to that town for the great tournament. Not
a knight of them all but plighted faith to follow where he
led, and to hold himself recreant and shamed if he failed
his oath.</p>
<br/>

<p>That same night the band came to the castle of the
prince with whom Meriadus was at war. He welcomed
them very gladly, and gave them lodging in his tower.
By their aid he had good hope to bring this quarrel to
an end. Very early in the morning the host came together
to set the battle in array. With clash of mail and noise
of horns they issued from the city gate, Gugemar riding
at their head. They drew before the castle where
Meriadus lay in strength, and sought to take it by storm.
But the keep was very strong, and Meriadus bore himself
as a stout and valiant knight. So Gugemar, like a wary
captain, sat himself down before the town, till all the folk
of that place were deemed by friend and sergeant to be
weak with hunger. Then they took that high keep with
the sword, and burnt it with fire. The lord thereof they
slew in his own hall; but Gugemar came forth, after
such labours as you have heard, bearing his lady with
him, to return in peace to his own land.</p>

<p>From this adventure that I have told you, has come
the Lay that minstrels chant to harp and viol—fair
is that song and sweet the tune.</p>





<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title">THE LAY OF THE DOLOROUS KNIGHT</h2>

<p>Hearken now to the Lay that once I heard a minstrel
chanting to his harp. In surety of its truth I will
name the city where this story passed. The Lay of the
Dolorous Knight, my harper called his song, but of those
who hearkened, some named it rather, The Lay of the
Four Sorrows.</p>

<p>In Nantes, of Brittany, there dwelt a dame who was
dearly held of all, for reason of the much good that
was found in her. This lady was passing fair of body,
apt in book as any clerk, and meetly schooled in every
grace that it becometh dame to have. So gracious of
person was this damsel, that throughout the realm there
was no knight could refrain from setting his heart upon
her, though he saw her but one only time. Although the
demoiselle might not return the love of so many, certainly
she had no wish to slay them all. Better by far that a
man pray and require in love all the dames of his country,
than run mad in woods for the bright eyes of one.
Therefore this dame gave courtesy and good will to each
alike. Even when she might not hear a lover's words, so
sweetly she denied his wish that the more he held her dear
and was the more her servant for that fond denial. So
because of her great riches of body and of heart, this lady
of whom I tell, was prayed and required in love by
the lords of her country, both by night and by day.</p>

<p>Now in Brittany lived four young barons, but their
names I cannot tell. It is enough that they were desirable
in the eyes of maidens for reason of their beauty, and
that men esteemed them because they were courteous of
manner and open of hand. Moreover they were stout and
hardy knights amongst the spears, and rich and worthy
gentlemen of those very parts. Each of these four knights
had set his heart upon the lady, and for love of her
pained himself mightily, and did all that he was able, so
that by any means he might gain her favour. Each
prayed her privily for her love, and strove all that he
could to make him worthy of the gift, above his fellows.
For her part the lady was sore perplexed, and considered
in her mind very earnestly, which of these four knights
she should take as friend. But since they all were
loyal and worthy gentlemen, she durst not choose
amongst them; for she would not slay three lovers
with her hand so that one might have content. Therefore
to each and all, the dame made herself fair and
sweet of semblance. Gifts she gave to all alike. Tender
messages she sent to each. Every knight deemed himself
esteemed and favoured above his fellows, and by soft
words and fair service diligently strove to please. When
the knights gathered together for the games, each of
these lords contended earnestly for the prize, so that he
might be first, and draw on him the favour of his dame.
Each held her for his friend. Each bore upon him her
gift—pennon, or sleeve, or ring. Each cried her name
within the lists.</p>

<p>Now when Eastertide was come, a great tournament
was proclaimed to be held beyond the walls of Nantes,
that rich city. The four lovers were the appellants in
this tourney, and from every realm knights rode to
break a lance in honour of their dame. Frenchman
and Norman and Fleming; the hardiest knights of
Brabant, Boulogne and Anjou; each came to do his
devoir in the field. Nor was the chivalry of Nantes
backward in this quarrel, but till the vespers of the
tournament was come, they stayed themselves within
the lists, and struck stoutly for their lord. After the
four lovers had laced their harness upon them, they
issued forth from the city, followed by the knights who
were of their company in this adventure. But upon the
four fell the burden of the day, for they were known
of all by the embroidered arms upon their surcoat,
and the device fashioned on the shield. Now against
the four lovers arrayed themselves four other knights,
armed altogether in coats of mail, and helmets and
gauntlets of steel. Of these stranger knights two were
of Hainault, and the two others were Flemings. When
the four lovers saw their adversaries prepare themselves
for the combat, they had little desire to flee, but hastened
to join them in battle. Each lowered his spear, and
choosing his enemy, met him so eagerly that all men
wondered, for horse and man fell to the earth. The
four lovers recked little of their destriers, but freeing
their feet from the stirrups bent over the fallen foe,
and called on him to yield. When the friends of the
vanquished knights saw their case, they hastened to
their succour; so for their rescue there was a great press,
and many a mighty stroke with the sword.</p>

<p>The damsel stood upon a tower to watch these feats
of arms. By their blazoned coats and shields she knew
her knights; she saw their marvellous deeds, yet might
not say who did best, nor give to one the praise. But
the tournament was no longer a seemly and ordered
battle. The ranks of the two companies were confused
together, so that every man fought against his fellow,
and none might tell whether he struck his comrade or
his foe. The four lovers did well and worshipfully, so
that all men deemed them worthy of the prize. But
when evening was come, and the sport drew to its close,
their courage led them to folly. Having ventured too
far from their companions, they were set upon by their
adversaries, and assailed so fiercely that three were
slain outright. As to the fourth he yet lived, but
altogether mauled and shaken, for his thigh was broken,
and a spear head remained in his side. The four bodies
were fallen on the field, and lay with those who had
perished in that day. But because of the great mischief
these four lovers had done their adversaries, their
shields were cast despitefully without the lists; but
in this their foemen did wrongfully, and all men held
them in sore displeasure.</p>

<p>Great were the lamentation and the cry when the
news of this mischance was noised about the city. Such
a tumult of mourning was never before heard, for the
whole city was moved. All men hastened forth to the
place where the lists were set. Meetly to mourn the
dead there rode nigh upon two thousand knights, with
hauberks unlaced, and uncovered heads, plucking upon
their beards. So the four lovers were placed each upon
his shield, and being brought back in honour to Nantes,
were carried to the house of that dame, whom so greatly
they had loved. When the lady knew this distressful
adventure, straightway she fell to the ground. Being
returned from her swoon, she made her complaint,
calling upon her lovers each by his name.</p>

<p>"Alas," said she, "what shall I do, for never shall
I know happiness again. These four knights had set their
hearts upon me, and despite their great treasure,
esteemed my love as richer than all their wealth. Alas,
for the fair and valiant knight! Alas, for the loyal and
generous man! By gifts such as these they sought to
gain my favour, but how might lady bereave three of
life, so as to cherish one. Even now I cannot tell for
whom I have most pity, or who was closest to my mind.
But three are dead, and one is sore stricken; neither
is there anything in the world which can bring me
comfort. Only this is there to do—to give the slain
men seemly burial, and, if it may be, to heal their
comrade of his wounds."</p>

<p>So, because of her great love and nobleness, the lady
caused these three distressful knights to be buried well
and worshipfully in a rich abbey. In that place she
offered their Mass penny, and gave rich offerings of
silver and of lights besides. May God have mercy
on them in that day. As for the wounded knight
she commanded him to be carried to her own chamber.
She sent for surgeons, and gave him into their hands.
These searched his wounds so skilfully, and tended him
with so great care, that presently his hurt commenced
to heal. Very often was the lady in the chamber, and
very tenderly she cherished the stricken man. Yet ever
she felt pity for the three Knights of the Sorrows, and
ever she went heavily by reason of their deaths.</p>

<p>Now on a summer's day, the lady and the knight
sat together after meat. She called to mind the sorrow
that was hers; so that, in a space, her head fell upon
her breast, and she gave herself altogether to her grief.
The knight looked earnestly upon his dame. Well he
might see that she was far away, and clearly he perceived
the cause.</p>

<p>"Lady," said he, "you are in sorrow. Open now
your grief to me. If you tell me what is in your heart
perchance I may find you comfort."</p>

<p>"Fair friend," replied she, "I think of what is gone,
and remember your companions, who are dead. Never
was lady of my peerage, however fair and good and
gracious, ever loved by four such valiant gentlemen,
nor ever lost them in one single day. Save you—who
were so maimed and in such peril—all are gone. Therefore
I call to mind those who loved me so dearly, and am
the saddest lady beneath the sun. To remember these
things, of you four I shall make a Lay, and will call it
the Lay of the Four Sorrows."</p>

<p>When the knight heard these words he made answer
very swiftly,
"Lady, name it not the Lay of the Four Sorrows,
but, rather, the Lay of the Dolorous Knight. Would
you hear the reason why it should bear this name?
My three comrades have finished their course; they
have nothing more to hope of their life. They are gone,
and with them the pang of their great sorrow, and the
knowledge of their enduring love for you. I alone have
come, all amazed and fearful, from the net wherein
they were taken, but I find my life more bitter than my
comrades found the grave. I see you on your goings
and comings about the house. I may speak with you
both matins and vespers. But no other joy do I get—
neither clasp nor kiss, nothing but a few empty, courteous
words. Since all these evils are come upon me because
of you, I choose death rather than life. For this reason
your Lay should bear my name, and be called the Lay
of the Dolorous Knight. He who would name it the
Lay of the Four Sorrows would name it wrongly, and
not according to the truth."</p>

<p>"By my faith," replied the lady, "this is a fair
saying. So shall the song be known as the Lay of the
Dolorous Knight."</p>

<p>Thus was the Lay conceived, made perfect, and
brought to a fair birth. For this reason it came by its
name; though to this day some call it the Lay of the
Four Sorrows. Either name befits it well, for the story
tells of both these matters, but it is the use and wont
in this land to call it the Lay of the Dolorous Knight.
Here it ends; no more is there to say. I heard no
more, and nothing more I know. Perforce I bring my
story to a close.</p>

<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title">THE LAY OF ELIDUC</h2>

<p>Now will I rehearse before you a very ancient Breton
Lay. As the tale was told to me, so, in turn, will I tell
it over again, to the best of my art and knowledge.
Hearken now to my story, its why and its reason.</p>

<p>In Brittany there lived a knight, so courteous and so
brave, that in all the realm there was no worthier lord than
he. This knight was named Eliduc. He had wedded in
his youth a noble lady of proud race and name. They
had long dwelt together in peace and content, for their
hearts were fixed on one another in faith and loyalty.
Now it chanced that Eliduc sought his fortune in a
far land, where there was a great war. There he loved
a Princess, the daughter of the King and Queen of those
parts. Guillardun was the maiden's name, and in all
the realm was none more fair. The wife of Eliduc had to
name, Guildeluec, in her own country. By reason of
these two ladies their story is known as the Lay of Guildeluec
and Guillardun, but at first it was rightly called
the Lay of Eliduc. The name is a little matter; but
if you hearken to me you shall learn the story of these
three lovers, in its pity and its truth.</p>

<p>Eliduc had as lord and suzerain, the King of Brittany
over Sea. The knight was greatly loved and cherished
of his prince, by reason of his long and loyal service.
When the King's business took him from his realm,
Eliduc was his master's Justice and Seneschal. He
governed the country well and wisely, and held it from
the foe with a strong hand. Nevertheless, in spite of
all, much evil was appointed unto him. Eliduc was a
mighty hunter, and by the King's grace, he would chase
the stag within the woods. He was cunning and fair as
Tristan, and so wise in venery, that the oldest forester
might not gainsay him in aught concerning the shaw.
But by reason of malice and envy, certain men accused
him to the King that he had meddled with the royal
pleasaunce. The King bade Eliduc to avoid his Court.
He gave no reason for his commandment, and the knight
might learn nothing of the cause. Often he prayed the
King that he might know whereof he was accused.
Often he begged his lord not to heed the specious and
crafty words of his foes. He called to mind the wounds
he had gained in his master's wars, but was answered
never a word. When Eliduc found that he might get
no speech with his lord, it became his honour to depart.
He returned to his house, and calling his friends around
him, opened out to them this business of the King's
wrath, in recompense for his faithful service.</p>

<p>"I did not reckon on a King's gratitude; but as the
proverb says, it is useless for a farmer to dispute with
the horse in his plough. The wise and virtuous man
keeps faith to his lord, and bears goodwill to his neighbour,
not for what he may receive in return."</p>

<p>Then the knight told his friends that since he might
no longer stay in his own country, he should cross the
sea to the realm of Logres, and sojourn there awhile,
for his solace. His fief he placed in the hands of his wife,
and he required of his men, and of all who held him
dear, that they would serve her loyally. Having given
good counsel to the utmost of his power, the knight
prepared him for the road. Right heavy were his friends
and kin, that he must go forth from amongst them.</p>

<p>Eliduc took with him ten knights of his household, and
set out on his journey. His dame came with him so far
as she was able, wringing her hands, and making much
sorrow, at the departure of her husband. At the end
he pledged good faith to her, as she to him, and so she
returned to her own home. Eliduc went his way, till
he came to a haven on the sea. He took ship, and sailed
to the realm of Totenois, for many kings dwell in that
country, and ever there were strife and war. Now,
near to Exeter, in this land, there dwelt a King, right
rich and strong, but old and very full of years. He had
no son of his body, but one maid only, young, and of
an age to wed. Since he would not bestow this damsel
on a certain prince of his neighbours, this lord made
mortal war upon his fellow, spoiling and wasting all
his land. The ancient King, for surety, had set his
daughter within a castle, fair and very strong. He had
charged the sergeants not to issue forth from the gates,
and for the rest there was none so bold as to seek to
storm the keep, or even to joust about the barriers.
When Eliduc was told of this quarrel, he needed to go
no farther, and sojourned for awhile in the land. He
turned over in his mind which of these princes dealt
unjustly with his neighbour. Since he deemed that the
agèd king was the more vexed and sorely pressed in
the matter, he resolved to aid him to the best of his
might, and to take arms in his service. Eliduc, therefore,
wrote letters to the King, telling him that he had
quitted his own country, and sought refuge in the King's
realm. For his part he was willing to fight as a mercenary
in the King's quarrel, and if a safe conduct were
given him, he and the knights of his company would
ride, forthwith, to their master's aid. This letter,
Eliduc sent by the hands of his squires to the King.
When the ancient lord had read the letter, he rejoiced
greatly, and made much of the messengers. He summoned
his constable, and commanded him swiftly to
write out the safe conduct, that would bring the baron
to his side. For the rest he bade that the messengers
meetly should be lodged and apparelled, and that such
money should be given them as would be sufficient to
their needs. Then he sealed the safe conduct with his
royal seal, and sent it to Eliduc, straightway, by a sure
hand.</p>

<p>When Eliduc came in answer to the summons, he
was received with great honour by the King. His
lodging was appointed in the house of a grave and
courteous burgess of the city, who bestowed the fairest
chamber on his guest. Eliduc fared softly, both at bed
and board. He called to his table such good knights
as were in misease, by reason of prison or of war. He
charged his men that none should be so bold as to take
pelf or penny from the citizens of the town, during the
first forty days of their sojourn. But on the third day,
it was bruited about the streets, that the enemy were
near at hand. The country folk deemed that they
approached to invest the city, and to take the gates
by storm. When the noise and clamour of the fearful
burgesses came to the ears of Eliduc, he and his company
donned their harness, and got to horse, as quickly as
they might. Forty horsemen mounted with him; as
to the rest, many lay sick or hurt within the city, and
others were captives in the hands of the foe. These
forty stout sergeants waited for no sounding of trumpets;
they hastened to seek their captain at his lodging, and
rode at his back through the city gate.</p>

<p>"Sir," said they, "where you go, there we will follow,
and what you bid us, that shall we do."</p>

<p>"Friends," made answer the knight, "I thank you
for your fellowship. There is no man amongst us but
who wishes to molest the foe, and do them all the mischief
that he is able. If we await them in the town, we
defend ourselves with the shield, and not with the
sword. To my mind it is better to fall in the field than
to hide behind walls; but if any of you have a wiser
counsel to offer, now let him speak."</p>

<p>"Sir," replied a soldier of the company, "through
the wood, in good faith, there runs a path, right strict
and narrow. It is the wont of the enemy to approach
our city by this track. After their deeds of arms before
the walls, it is their custom to return by the way they
came, helmet on saddle bow, and hauberk unbraced.
If we might catch them, unready in the path, we could
trouble them very grievously, even though it be at the
peril of our lives."</p>

<p>"Friends," answered Eliduc, "you are all the King's
men, and are bound to serve him faithfully, even to
the death. Come, now, with me where I will go, and
do that thing which you shall see me do. I give you my
word as a loyal gentleman, that no harm shall hap to
any. If we gain spoil and riches from the foe, each shall
have his lot in the ransom. At the least we may do them
much hurt and mischief in this quarrel."</p>

<p>Eliduc set his men in ambush, near by that path,
within the wood. He told over to them, like a cunning
captain, the crafty plan he had devised, and taught them
how to play their parts, and to call upon his name.
When the foe had entered on that perilous path, and
were altogether taken in the snare, Eliduc cried his
name, and summoned his companions to bear themselves
like men. This they did stoutly, and assailed their
enemy so fiercely that he was dismayed beyond measure,
and his line being broken, fled to the forest. In this
fight was the constable taken, together with fifty and
five other lords, who owned themselves prisoners, and
were given to the keeping of the squires. Great was
the spoil in horse and harness, and marvellous was the
wealth they gained in gold and ransom. So having
done such great deeds in so short a space, they returned
to the city, joyous and content.</p>

<p>The King looked forth from a tower. He feared
grievously for his men, and made his complaint of
Eliduc, who—he deemed—had betrayed him in his need.
Upon the road he saw a great company, charged and
laden with spoil. Since the number of those who
returned was more than those who went forth, the king
knew not again his own. He came down from the tower,
in doubt and sore trouble, bidding that the gates should
be made fast, and that men should mount upon the walls.
For such coil as this, there was slender warrant. A
squire who was sent out, came back with all speed, and
showed him of this adventure. He told over the story of
the ambush, and the tale of the prisoners. He rehearsed
how the constable was taken, and that many a knight
was wounded, and many a brave man slain. When the
King might give credence thereto, he had more joy than
ever king before. He got him from his tower, and going
before Eliduc, he praised him to his face, and rendered
him the captives as a gift. Eliduc gave the King's
bounty to his men. He bestowed on them besides, all
the harness and the spoil; keeping, for his part, but
three knights, who had won much honour in the battle.
From this day the King loved and cherished Eliduc very
dearly. He held the knight, and his company, for a full
year in his service, and at the end of the year, such faith
had he in the knight's loyalty, that he appointed him
Seneschal and Constable of his realm.</p>

<p>Eliduc was not only a brave and wary captain; he
was also a courteous gentleman, right goodly to behold.</p>

<p>That fair maiden, the daughter of the King, heard tell
of his deeds, and desired to see his face, because of the
good men spake of him. She sent her privy chamberlain
to the knight, praying him to come to her house, that
she might solace herself with the story of his deeds, for
greatly she wondered that he had no care for her friendship.
Eliduc gave answer to the chamberlain that
he would ride forthwith, since much he desired to
meet so high a dame. He bade his squire to saddle
his destrier, and rode to the palace, to have speech
with the lady. Eliduc stood without the lady's
chamber, and prayed the chamberlain to tell the dame
that he had come, according to her wish. The chamberlain
came forth with a smiling face, and straightway
led him in the chamber. When the princess saw the
knight, she cherished him very sweetly, and welcomed
him in the most honourable fashion. The knight
gazed upon the lady, who was passing fair to see.
He thanked her courteously, that she was pleased to
permit him to have speech with so high a princess.
Guillardun took Eliduc by the hand, and seated him
upon the bed, near her side. They spake together of
many things, for each found much to say. The maiden
looked closely upon the knight, his face and semblance;
to her heart she said that never before had she beheld
so comely a man. Her eyes might find no blemish in
his person, and Love knocked upon her heart, requiring
her to love, since her time had come. She sighed, and her
face lost its fair colour; but she cared only to hide her
trouble from the knight, lest he should think her the
less maidenly therefore. When they had talked together
for a great space, Eliduc took his leave, and went
his way. The lady would have kept him longer gladly,
but since she did not dare, she allowed him to depart.
Eliduc returned to his lodging, very pensive and deep
in thought. He called to mind that fair maiden,
the daughter of his King, who so sweetly had bidden
him to her side, and had kissed him farewell, with
sighs that were sweeter still. He repented him right
earnestly that he had lived so long a while in the land
without seeking her face, but promised that often
he would enter her palace now. Then he remembered
the wife whom he had left in his own house. He
recalled the parting between them, and the covenant
he made, that good faith and stainless honour should
be ever betwixt the twain. But the maiden, from
whom he came, was willing to take him as her knight!
If such was her will, might any pluck him from her
hand?</p>

<p>All night long, that fair maiden, the daughter of the
King, had neither rest nor sleep. She rose up, very
early in the morning, and commanding her chamberlain,
opened out to him all that was in her heart. She leaned
her brow against the casement.</p>

<p>"By my faith," she said, "I am fallen into a deep
ditch, and sorrow has come upon me. I love Eliduc,
the good knight, whom my father made his Seneschal.
I love him so dearly that I turn the whole night upon
my bed, and cannot close my eyes, nor sleep. If he
assured me of his heart, and loved me again, all my
pleasure should be found in his happiness. Great
might be his profit, for he would become King of this
realm, and little enough is it for his deserts, so courteous
is he and wise. If he have nothing better than friendship
to give me, I choose death before life, so deep is
my distress."</p>

<p>When the princess had spoken what it pleased her to
say, the chamberlain, whom she had bidden, gave her
loyal counsel.</p>

<p>"Lady," said he, "since you have set your love upon
this knight, send him now—if so it please you—some
goodly gift-girdle or scarf or ring. If he receive the
gift with delight, rejoicing in your favour, you may be
assured that he loves you. There is no Emperor, under
Heaven, if he were tendered your tenderness, but would
go the more lightly for your grace."</p>

<p>The damsel hearkened to the counsel of her chamberlain,
and made reply,
"If only I knew that he desired my love! Did ever
maiden woo her knight before, by asking whether he
loved or hated her? What if he make of me a mock and
a jest in the ears of his friends! Ah, if the secrets of the
heart were but written on the face! But get you ready,
for go you must, at once."</p>

<p>"Lady," answered the chamberlain, "I am ready to
do your bidding."</p>

<p>"You must greet the knight a hundred times in my
name, and will place my girdle in his hand, and this my
golden ring."</p>

<p>When the chamberlain had gone upon his errand, the
maiden was so sick at heart, that for a little she would
have bidden him return. Nevertheless, she let him
go his way, and eased her shame with words.</p>

<p>"Alas, what has come upon me, that I should put my
heart upon a stranger. I know nothing of his folk,
whether they be mean or high; nor do I know whether he
will part as swiftly as he came. I have done foolishly,
and am worthy of blame, since I have bestowed my
love very lightly. I spoke to him yesterday for
the first time, and now I pray him for his love.
Doubtless he will make me a song! Yet if he be the
courteous gentleman I believe him, he will understand,
and not deal hardly with me. At least the dice are
cast, and if he may not love me, I shall know myself
the most woeful of ladies, and never taste of joy all
the days of my life."</p>
<br/>

<p>Whilst the maiden lamented in this fashion, the chamberlain
hastened to the lodging of Eliduc. He came
before the knight, and having saluted him in his lady's
name, he gave to his hand the ring and the girdle. The
knight thanked him earnestly for the gifts. He placed
the ring upon his finger, and the girdle he girt about his
body. He said no more to the chamberlain, nor asked
him any questions; save only that he proffered him a
gift. This the messenger might not have, and returned
the way he came. The chamberlain entered in the palace
and found the princess within her chamber. He greeted
her on the part of the knight, and thanked her for her
bounty.</p>

<p>"Diva, diva," cried the lady hastily, "hide nothing
from me; does he love me, or does he not?"</p>

<p>"Lady," answered the chamberlain, "as I deem, he
loves you, and truly. Eliduc is no cozener with words.
I hold him for a discreet and prudent gentleman, who
knows well how to hide what is in his heart. I gave him
greeting in your name, and granted him your gifts. He
set the ring upon his finger, and as to your girdle, he girt
it upon him, and belted it tightly about his middle. I
said no more to him, nor he to me; but if he received not
your gifts in tenderness, I am the more deceived. Lady, I
have told you his words: I cannot tell you his thoughts.
Only, mark carefully what I am about to say. If
Eliduc had not a richer gift to offer, he would not have
taken your presents at my hand."</p>

<p>"It pleases you to jest," said the lady. "I know well
that Eliduc does not altogether hate me. Since my only
fault is to cherish him too fondly, should he hate me,
he would indeed be blameworthy. Never again by you,
or by any other, will I require him of aught, or look to
him for comfort. He shall see that a maiden's love is no
slight thing, lightly given, and lightly taken again—but,
perchance, he will not dwell in the realm so long as to
know of the matter."</p>

<p>"Lady, the knight has covenanted to serve the King,
in all loyalty, for the space of a year. You have full
leisure to tell, whatever you desire him to learn."</p>

<p>When the maiden heard that Eliduc remained in the
country, she rejoiced very greatly. She was glad that the
knight would sojourn awhile in her city, for she knew
naught of the torment he endured, since first he looked
upon her. He had neither peace nor delight, for he
could not get her from his mind. He reproached himself
bitterly. He called to remembrance the covenant he
made with his wife, when he departed from his own land,
that he would never be false to his oath. But his heart
was a captive now, in a very strong prison. He desired
greatly to be loyal and honest, but he could not deny his
love for the maiden—Guillardun, so frank and so fair.</p>

<p>Eliduc strove to act as his honour required. He had
speech and sight of the lady, and did not refuse her kiss
and embrace. He never spoke of love, and was diligent
to offend in nothing. He was careful in this, because he
would keep faith with his wife, and would attempt no
matter against his King. Very grievously he pained himself,
but at the end he might do no more. Eliduc
caused his horse to be saddled, and calling his companions
about him, rode to the castle to get audience of
the King. He considered, too, that he might see his
lady, and learn what was in her heart. It was the hour
of meat, and the King having risen from table, had entered
in his daughter's chamber. The King was at chess,
with a lord who had but come from over-sea. The lady
sat near the board, to watch the movements of the game.
When Eliduc came before the prince, he welcomed him
gladly, bidding him to seat himself close at hand. Afterwards
he turned to his daughter, and said,
"Princess, it becomes you to have a closer friendship
with this lord, and to treat him well and worshipfully.
Amongst five hundred, there is no better knight than he."</p>

<p>When the maiden had listened demurely to her father's
commandment, there was no gayer lady than she. She
rose lightly to her feet, and taking the knight a little from
the others, seated him at her side. They remained silent,
because of the greatness of their love. She did not dare
to speak the first, and to him the maid was more dreadful
than a knight in mail. At the end Eliduc thanked her
courteously for the gifts she had sent him; never was
grace so precious and so kind. The maiden made answer
to the knight, that very dear to her was the use he had
found for her ring, and the girdle with which he had
belted his body. She loved him so fondly that she
wished him for her husband. If she might not have her
wish, one thing she knew well, that she would take no
living man, but would die unwed. She trusted he would
not deny her hope.</p>

<p>"Lady," answered the knight, "I have great joy in
your love, and thank you humbly for the goodwill you
bear me. I ought indeed to be a happy man, since you
deign to show me at what price you value our friendship.
Have you remembered that I may not remain always in
your realm? I covenanted with the King to serve him
as his man for the space of one year. Perchance I may
stay longer in his service, for I would not leave him till
his quarrel be ended. Then I shall return to my own
land; so, fair lady, you permit me to say farewell."</p>

<p>The maiden made answer to her knight,
"Fair friend, right sweetly I thank you for your
courteous speech. So apt a clerk will know, without
more words, that he may have of me just what he would.
It becomes my love to give faith to all you say."</p>

<p>The two lovers spoke together no further; each was
well assured of what was in the other's heart. Eliduc
rode back to his lodging, right joyous and content.
Often he had speech with his friend, and passing great
was the love which grew between the twain.</p>

<p>Eliduc pressed on the war so fiercely that in the end
he took captive the King who troubled his lord, and had
delivered the land from its foes. He was greatly praised
of all as a crafty captain in the field, and a hardy comrade
with the spear. The poor and the minstrel counted
him a generous knight. About this time that King,
who had bidden Eliduc avoid his realm, sought diligently
to find him. He had sent three messengers beyond the
seas to seek his ancient Seneschal. A strong enemy
had wrought him much grief and loss. All his castles
were taken from him, and all his country was a spoil
to the foe. Often and sorely he repented him of the evil
counsel to which he had given ear. He mourned the
absence of his mightiest knight, and drove from his
councils those false lords who, for malice and envy,
had defamed him. These he outlawed for ever from his
realm. The King wrote letters to Eliduc, conjuring
him by the loving friendship that was once between
them, and summoning him as a vassal is required of
his lord, to hasten to his aid, in that his bitter need.
When Eliduc heard these tidings they pressed heavily
upon him, by reason of the grievous love he bore the
dame. She, too, loved him with a woman's whole heart.
Between the two there was nothing but the purest love
and tenderness. Never by word or deed had they spoiled
their friendship. To speak a little closely together;
to give some fond and foolish gift; this was the sum
of their love. In her wish and hope the maiden trusted
to hold the knight in her land, and to have him as her
lord. Naught she deemed that he was wedded to a wife
beyond the sea.</p>

<p>"Alas," said Eliduc, "I have loitered too long in
this country, and have gone astray. Here I have set
my heart on a maiden, Guillardun, the daughter of the
King, and she, on me. If, now, we part, there is no
help that one, or both, of us, must die. Yet go I must.
My lord requires me by letters, and by the oath of fealty
that I have sworn. My own honour demands that I
should return to my wife. I dare not stay; needs must
I go. I cannot wed my lady, for not a priest in Christendom
would make us man and wife. All things turn to
blame. God, what a tearing asunder will our parting
be! Yet there is one who will ever think me in the right,
though I be held in scorn of all. I will be guided by her
wishes, and what she counsels that will I do. The King,
her sire, is troubled no longer by any war. First, I will
go to him, praying that I may return to my own land,
for a little, because of the need of my rightful lord.
Then I will seek out the maiden, and show her the whole
business. She will tell me her desire, and I shall act
according to her wish."</p>

<p>The knight hesitated no longer as to the path he should
follow. He went straight to the King, and craved leave
to depart. He told him the story of his lord's distress,
and read, and placed in the King's hands, the letters
calling him back to his home. When the King had read
the writing, and knew that Eliduc purposed to depart,
he was passing sad and heavy. He offered the knight
the third part of his kingdom, with all the treasure that
he pleased to ask, if he would remain at his side. He
offered these things to the knight—these, and the
gratitude of all his days besides.</p>

<p>"Do not tempt me, sire," replied the knight. "My
lord is in such deadly peril, and his letters have come
so great a way to require me, that go I must to aid him
in his need. When I have ended my task, I will return
very gladly, if you care for my services, and with me a
goodly company of knights to fight in your quarrels."</p>

<p>The King thanked Eliduc for his words, and granted
him graciously the leave that he demanded. He gave
him, moreover, all the goods of his house; gold and
silver, hound and horses, silken cloths, both rich and
fair, these he might have at his will. Eliduc took of
them discreetly, according to his need. Then, very
softly, he asked one other gift. If it pleased the King,
right willingly would he say farewell to the princess,
before he went. The King replied that it was his pleasure,
too. He sent a page to open the door of the maiden's
chamber, and to tell her the knight's request. When
she saw him, she took him by the hand, and saluted him
very sweetly. Eliduc was the more fain of counsel
than of claspings. He seated himself by the maiden's
side, and as shortly as he might, commenced to show
her of the business. He had done no more than read her
of his letters, than her face lost its fair colour, and near
she came to swoon. When Eliduc saw her about to
fall, he knew not what he did, for grief. He kissed her
mouth, once and again, and wept above her, very
tenderly. He took, and held her fast in his arms, till
she had returned from her swoon.</p>

<p>"Fair dear friend," said he softly, "bear with me
while I tell you that you are my life and my death,
and in you is all my comfort. I have bidden farewell
to your father, and purposed to go back to my own land,
for reason of this bitter business of my lord. But my
will is only in your pleasure, and whatever the future
brings me, your counsel I will do."</p>

<p>"Since you cannot stay," said the maiden, "take
me with you, wherever you go. If not, my life is so
joyless without you, that I would wish to end it with
my knife."</p>

<p>Very sweetly made answer Sir Eliduc, for in honesty
he loved honest maid,
"Fair friend, I have sworn faith to your father, and
am his man. If I carried you with me, I should give
the lie to my troth. Let this covenant be made between
us. Should you give me leave to return to my own
land I swear to you on my honour as a knight, that I
will come again on any day that you shall name. My
life is in your hands. Nothing on earth shall keep me
from your side, so only that I have life and health."</p>

<p>Then she, who loved so fondly, granted her knight
permission to depart, and fixed the term, and named the
day for his return. Great was their sorrow that the hour
had come to bid farewell. They gave rings of gold for
remembrance, and sweetly kissed adieu. So they severed
from each other's arms.</p>

<p>Eliduc sought the sea, and with a fair wind, crossed
swiftly to the other side. His lord was greatly content
to learn the tidings of his knight's return. His friends
and his kinsfolk came to greet him, and the common
folk welcomed him very gladly. But, amongst them all,
none was so blithe at his home-coming as the fair and
prudent lady who was his wife. Despite this show of
friendship, Eliduc was ever sad, and deep in thought.
He went heavily, till he might look upon his friend.
He felt no happiness, nor made pretence of any, till he
should meet with her again. His wife was sick at heart,
because of the coldness of her husband. She took
counsel with her soul, as to what she had done amiss.
Often she asked him privily, if she had come short or
offended in any measure, whilst he was without the
realm. If she was accused by any, let him tell her the
accusation, that she might purge herself of the offence.</p>

<p>"Wife," answered Eliduc, "neither I, nor any other,
charge you with aught that is against your honour to
do. The cause of my sorrow is in myself. I have pledged
my faith to the King of that country, from whence I
come, that I will return to help him in his need. When
my lord the King has peace in his realm, within eight
days I shall be once more upon the sea. Great travail
I must endure, and many pains I shall suffer, in readiness
for that hour. Return I must, and till then I have no
mind for anything but toil; for I will not give the lie
to my plighted word."</p>

<p>Eliduc put his fief once more in the hands of his dame.
He sought his lord, and aided him to the best of his
might. By the counsel and prowess of the knight, the
King came again into his own. When the term appointed
by his lady, and the day she named for his return drew
near, Eliduc wrought in such fashion that peace was
accorded between the foes. Then the knight made him
ready for his journey, and took thought to the folk
he should carry with him. His choice fell on two of
his nephews, whom he loved very dearly, and on a
certain chamberlain of his household. These were trusted
servitors, who were of his inmost mind, and knew much
of his counsel. Together with these went his squires,
these only, for Eliduc had no care to take many. All
these, nephew and squire and chamberlain, Eliduc
made to promise, and confirm by an oath, that they
would reveal nothing of his business.</p>

<p>The company put to sea without further tarrying,
and, crossing quickly, came to that land where Eliduc
so greatly desired to be. The knight sought a hostel
some distance from the haven, for he would not be seen
of any, nor have it bruited that Eliduc was returned.
He called his chamberlain, and sent him to his friend,
bearing letters that her knight had come, according to
the covenant that had been made. At nightfall, before
the gates were made fast, Eliduc issued forth from the
city, and followed after his messenger. He had clothed
himself in mean apparel, and rode at a footpace
straight to the city, where dwelt the daughter of the
King. The chamberlain arrived before the palace,
and by dint of asking and prying, found himself within
the lady's chamber. He saluted the maiden, and told
her that her lover was near. When Guillardun heard
these tidings she was astonied beyond measure, and
for joy and pity wept right tenderly. She kissed the
letters of her friend, and the messenger who brought
such welcome tidings. The chamberlain prayed the lady
to attire and make her ready to join her friend. The
day was spent in preparing for the adventure, according
to such plan as had been devised. When dark was come,
and all was still, the damsel stole forth from the palace,
and the chamberlain with her. For fear that any man
should know her again, the maiden had hidden, beneath
a riding cloak, her silken gown, embroidered with gold.
About the space of a bow shot from the city gate,
there was a coppice standing within a fair meadow.
Near by this wood, Eliduc and his comrades awaited
the coming of Guillardun. When Eliduc saw the lady,
wrapped in her mantle, and his chamberlain leading
her by the hand, he got from his horse, and kissed her
right tenderly. Great joy had his companions at so
fair a sight. He set her on the horse, and climbing
before her, took bridle in glove, and returned to the haven,
with all the speed he might. He entered forthwith in
the ship, which put to sea, having on board none,
save Eliduc, his men, and his lady, Guillardun. With
a fair wind, and a quiet hour, the sailors thought that
they would swiftly come to shore. But when their
journey was near its end, a sudden tempest arose on
the sea. A mighty wind drove them far from their
harbourage, so that their rudder was broken, and their
sail torn from the mast. Devoutly they cried on St.
Nicholas, St. Clement, and Madame St. Mary, to aid
them in this peril. They implored the Mother that she
would approach her Son, not to permit them to perish,
but to bring them to the harbour where they would
come. Without sail or oar, the ship drifted here and
there, at the mercy of the storm. They were very close
to death, when one of the company, with a loud voice
began to cry,
"What need is there of prayers! Sir, you have with
you, her, who brings us to our death. We shall never win
to land, because you, who already have a faithful wife,
seek to wed this foreign woman, against God and His
law, against honour and your plighted troth. Grant us
to cast her in the sea, and straightway the winds and
the waves will be still."</p>

<p>When Eliduc heard these words he was like to come
to harm for rage.</p>

<p>"Bad servant and felon traitor," he cried, "you
should pay dearly for your speech, if I might leave my
lady."</p>

<p>Eliduc held his friend fast in his arms, and cherished
her as well as he was able. When the lady heard that
her knight was already wedded in his own realm, she
swooned where she lay. Her face became pale and discoloured;
she neither breathed nor sighed, nor could
any bring her any comfort. Those who carried her to
a sheltered place, were persuaded that she was but dead,
because of the fury of the storm. Eliduc was passing
heavy. He rose to his feet, and hastening to his squire,
smote him so grievously with an oar, that he fell senseless
on the deck. He haled him by his legs to the side of
the ship and flung the body in the sea, where it was
swiftly swallowed by the waves. He went to the broken
rudder, and governed the nave so skilfully, that it
presently drew to land. So, having come to their fair
haven, they cast anchor, and made fast their bridge to
the shore. Dame Guillardun lay yet in her swoon, and
seemed no other than if she were really dead. Eliduc's
sorrow was all the more, since he deemed that he had
slain her with his hand. He inquired of his companions
in what near place they might lay the lady to her rest,
"for I will not bid her farewell, till she is put in holy
ground with such pomp and rite as befit the obsequies
of the daughter of a King." His comrades answered
him never a word, for they were all bemused by reason
of what had befallen. Eliduc, therefore, considered
within himself to what place he should carry the lady.
His own home was so near the haven where he had
come, that very easily they could ride there before
evening. He called to mind that in his realm there was
a certain great forest, both long and deep. Within
this wood there was a little chapel, served by a holy
hermit for forty years, with whom Eliduc had oftimes
spoken.</p>

<p>"To this holy man," he said, "I will bear my lady.
In his chapel he shall bury her sweet body. I will endow
him so richly of my lands, that upon her chantry shall
be founded a mighty abbey. There some convent of
monks or nuns or canons shall ever hold her in remembrance,
praying God to grant her mercy in His day."</p>

<p>Eliduc got to horse, but first took oath of his comrades
that never, by them, should be discovered, that which
they should see. He set his friend before him on the
palfrey, and thus the living and the dead rode together,
till they had entered the wood, and come before the
chapel. The squires called and beat upon the door, but
it remained fast, and none was found to give them any
answer. Eliduc bade that one should climb through a
window, and open the door from within. When they
had come within the chapel they found a new made
tomb, and writ thereon, that the holy hermit having
finished his course, was made perfect, eight days before
Passing sad was Eliduc, and esmayed. His companions
would have digged a second grave, and set therein, his
friend; but the knight would in no wise consent, for—he
said—he purposed to take counsel of the priests
of his country, as to building some church or abbey
above her tomb. "At this hour we will but lay her
body before the altar, and commend her to God His holy
keeping." He commanded them to bring their mantles
and make a bed upon the altar-pace. Thereon they
laid the maiden, and having wrapped her close in her
lover's cloak, left her alone. When the moment came
for Eliduc to take farewell of his lady, he deemed that
his own last hour had come. He kissed her eyes and her
face.</p>

<p>"Fair friend," said he, "if it be pleasing to God,
never will I bear sword or lance again, or seek the
pleasures of this mortal world. Fair friend, in an ill
hour you saw me! Sweet lady, in a bitter hour you
followed me to death! Fairest, now were you a queen,
were it not for the pure and loyal love you set upon me?
Passing sad of heart am I for you, my friend. The hour
that I have seen you in your shroud, I will take the
habit of some holy order, and every day, upon your
tomb, I will tell over the chaplet of my sorrow."</p>

<p>Having taken farewell of the maiden, Eliduc came
forth from the chapel, and closed the doors. He sent
messages to his wife, that he was returning to his house,
but weary and overborne. When the dame heard these
tidings, she was happy in her heart, and made ready
to greet him. She received her lord tenderly; but
little joy came of her welcome, for she got neither smiles
in answer, nor tender words in return. She dared not
inquire the reason, during the two days Eliduc remained
in the house. The knight heard Mass very early in the
morning, and then set forth on the road leading to the
chapel where the maiden lay. He found her as he had
parted, for she had not come back from her swoon,
and there was neither stir in her, nor breath. He
marvelled greatly, for he saw her, vermeil and white,
as he had known her in life. She had lost none of her
sweet colour, save that she was a little blanched. He
wept bitterly above her, and entreated for her soul.
Having made his prayer, he went again to his house.</p>

<p>On a day when Eliduc went forth, his wife called to
her a varlet of her household, commanding him to
follow his lord afar off, and mark where he went, and
on what business. She promised to give him harness
and horses, if he did according to her will. The varlet
hid himself in the wood, and followed so cunningly
after his lord, that he was not perceived. He watched
the knight enter the chapel, and heard the cry and
lamentation that he made. When Eliduc came out, the
varlet hastened to his mistress, and told her what he
had seen, the tears and dolour, and all that befell his
lord within the hermitage. The lady summoned all her
courage.</p>

<p>"We will go together, as soon as we may, to this
hermitage. My lord tells me that he rides presently to
the Court to speak with the King. I knew that my
husband loved this dead hermit very tenderly, but I
little thought that his loss would make him mad with
grief."</p>

<p>The next day the dame let her lord go forth in peace.
When, about noon, Eliduc rode to the Court to greet
his King, the lady rose quickly, and carrying the varlet
with her, went swiftly to the hermitage. She entered
the chapel, and saw the bed upon the altar-pace, and
the maiden thereon, like a new sprung rose. Stooping
down the lady removed the mantle. She marked the
rigid body, the long arms, and the frail white hands,
with their slender fingers, folded on the breast. Thus
she learned the secret of the sorrow of her lord. She
called the varlet within the chapel, and showed him
this wonder.</p>

<p>"Seest thou," she said, "this woman, who for beauty
shineth as a gem! This lady, in her life, was the lover
of my lord. It was for her that all his days were spoiled
by grief. By my faith I marvel little at his sorrow,
since I, who am a woman too, will—for pity's sake or
love—never know joy again, having seen so fair a lady
in the dust."</p>

<p>So the wife wept above the body of the maiden.
Whilst the lady sat weeping, a weasel came from under
the altar, and ran across Guillardun's body. The varlet
smote it with his staff, and killed it as it passed. He
took the vermin and flung it away. The companion
of this weasel presently came forth to seek him. She
ran to the place where he lay, and finding that he would
not get him on his feet, seemed as one distraught.
She went forth from the chapel, and hastened to the
wood, from whence she returned quickly, bearing a
vermeil flower beneath her teeth. This red flower she
placed within the mouth of that weasel the varlet had
slain, and immediately he stood upon his feet. When
the lady saw this, she cried to the varlet,</p>

<p>"Throw, man, throw, and gain the flower."</p>

<p>The servitor flung his staff, and the weasels fled away,
leaving that fair flower upon the floor. The lady rose.
She took the flower, and returned with it swiftly to the
altar pace. Within the mouth of the maiden, she set
a flower that was more vermeil still. For a short space
the dame and the damsel were alike breathless. Then
the maiden came to herself, with a sigh. She opened
her eyes, and commenced to speak.</p>

<p>"Diva," she said, "have I slept so long, indeed!"</p>

<p>When the lady heard her voice she gave thanks to
God. She inquired of the maiden as to her name and
degree. The damsel made answer to her,
"Lady, I was born in Logres, and am daughter to
the King of that realm. Greatly there I loved a knight,
named Eliduc, the seneschal of my sire. We fled together
from my home, to my own most grievous fault.
He never told me that he was wedded to a wife in his
own country, and he hid the matter so cunningly, that
I knew naught thereof. When I heard tell of his dame,
I swooned for pure sorrow. Now I find that this false
lover, has, like a felon, betrayed me in a strange land.
What will chance to a maiden in so foul a plight? Great
is that woman's folly who puts her trust in man."</p>

<p>"Fair damsel," replied the lady, "there is nothing
in the whole world that can give such joy to this felon,
as to hear that you are yet alive. He deems that you
are dead, and every day he beweeps your swoon in the
chapel. I am his wife, and my heart is sick, just for
looking on his sorrow. To learn the reason of his grief,
I caused him to be followed, and that is why I have
found you here. It is a great happiness for me to
know that you live. You shall return with me to my
home, and I will place you in the tenderness of your
friend. Then I shall release him of his marriage troth,
since it is my dearest hope to take the veil."</p>

<p>When the wife had comforted the maiden with such
words, they went together to her own house. She called
to her servitor, and bade him seek his lord. The varlet
went here and there, till he lighted on Eliduc. He
came before him, and showed him of all these things.
Eliduc mounted straightway on his horse, and waiting
neither for squire or companion, that same night came
to his hall. When he found alive, her, who once was
dead, Eliduc thanked his wife for so dear a gift. He
rejoiced beyond measure, and of all his days, no day
was more happy than this. He kissed the maiden
often, and very sweetly she gave him again his kiss,
for great was the joy between the twain. The dame
looked on their happiness, and knew that her lord
meetly had bestowed his love. She prayed him, therefore,
that he would grant her leave to depart, since she would
serve God as a cloistered nun. Of his wealth she craved
such a portion as would permit her to found a convent.
He would then be able to wed the maiden on whom his
heart was set, for it was neither honest nor seemly that
a man should maintain a wife with either hand.</p>

<p>Eliduc could do no otherwise than consent. He gave
the permission she asked, and did all according to her
will. He endowed the lady of his lands, near by that
chapel and hermitage, within the wood. There he built
a church with offices and refectory, fair to see. Much
wealth he bestowed on the convent, in money and estate.
When all was brought to a good end, the lady took the
veil upon her head. Thirty other ladies entered in the
house with her, and long she ruled them as their Abbess,
right wisely and well.</p>

<p>Eliduc wedded with his friend, in great pomp, and
passing rich was the marriage feast. They dwelt in
unity together for many days, for ever between them
was perfect love. They walked uprightly, and gave
alms of their goods, till such a time as it became them
to turn to God. After much thought, Eliduc built a
great church close beside his castle. He endowed it
with all his gold and silver, and with the rest of his
land. He set priests there, and holy layfolk also, for
the business of the house, and the fair services of religion.</p>

<p>When all was builded and ordered, Eliduc offered himself,
with them, that he—weak man—might serve the
omnipotent God. He set with the Abbess Guildeluec
—who once was his dame—that wife whom he loved
so dearly well. The Abbess received her as a sister,
and welcomed her right honourably. She admonished
her in the offices of God, and taught her of the rules
and practice of their holy Order. They prayed to God
for their friend, that He would grant him mercy in His
day. In turn, he entreated God for them. Messages
came from convent and monastery as to how they fared,
so that each might encourage the other in His way.
Each strove painfully, for himself and his, to love God
the more dearly, and to abide in His holy faith. Each
made a good end, and the mercy of God was abundantly
made clear to all.</p>

<p>Of the adventure of these three lovers, the courteous
Bretons made this Lay for remembrance, since they
deemed it a matter that men should not forget.</p>


<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title">THE LAY OF THE NIGHTINGALE</h2>

<p>Now will I tell you a story, whereof the Breton harper
already has made a Lay. Laustic, I deem, men name
it in that country, which, being interpreted, means rossignol
in French, and nightingale in good plain English.</p>

<p>In the realm of Brittany stands a certain rich and
mighty city, called Saint Malo. There were citizens
of this township two knights, so well spoken and reputed
of all, that the city drew therefrom great profit and fame.
The houses of these lords were very near the one to the
other. One of the two knights had to wife a passing fair
lady, right gracious of manner and sweet of tongue.
Wondrous pleasure found this dame to array herself
richly, after the wont and fashion of her time. The other
knight was yet a bachelor. He was well accounted of
amongst his fellows as a hardy knight and as an honourable
man. He gave hospitality gladly. Largely he
gained, largely he spent, and willingly bestowed gifts of
all that he had.</p>

<p>This bachelor set his love upon his neighbour's wife.
By reason of his urgent prayers, his long suit and service,
and by reason that all men spake naught of him but
praise—perchance, also, for reason that he was never far
from her eye—presently this lady came to set her heart
on him again. Though these two friends loved right
tenderly, yet were they so private and careful in their
loves that none perceived what was in their hearts. No
man pried on them, or disturbed their goings and comings.
These were the more easy to devise since the bachelor
and the lady were such near neighbours. Their two
houses stood side by side, hall and cellar and combles.
Only between the gardens was built a high and ancient
wall, of worn gray stone. When the lady sat within her
bower, by leaning from the casement she and her
friend might speak together, he to her, and she to
him. They could also throw messages in writing, and
divers pretty gifts, the one to the other. Little enough
had they to displease them, and greatly were they at their
ease, save only that they might not take their pleasure
together, so often as their hearts had wished. For the
dame was guarded very straitly when her husband
was abroad. Yet not so strictly but that they might
have word and speech, the now by night and now
by day. At least, however close the watch and ward, none
might hinder that at times these fair lovers stood within
their casements, and looked fondly on the other's face.</p>

<p>Now after these friends had loved for a great space it
chanced that the season became warm and sweet. It
was the time when meadow and copse are green; when
orchards grow white with bloom, and birds break into
song as thickly as the bush to flower. It is the season
when he who loves would win to his desire. Truly I tell
you that the knight would have done all in his power to
attain his wish, and the lady, for her part, yearned for
sight and speech of her friend. At night, when the moon
shone clearly in the sky, and her lord lay sleeping at
her side, often the dame slipped softly from her bed,
and hastening to the casement, leaned forth to have
sight of him who watched. The greater part of the
dark they kept vigil together, for very pleasant it is to
look upon your friend, when sweeter things are denied.</p>

<p>This chanced so often, and the lady rose so frequently
from her bed, that her lord was altogether wrathful, and
many a time inquired the reason of her unrest.</p>

<p>"Husband," replied the dame, "there is no dearer joy
in this world, than to hear the nightingale sing. It
is to hearken to the song that rises so sweetly on the
night, that I lean forth from the casement. What tune
of harp or viol is half so fair! Because of my delight
in his song, and of my desire to hear, I may not shut
my eyes till it be morn."</p>

<p>When the husband heard the lady's words he laughed
within himself for wrath and malice. He purposed
that very soon the nightingale should sing within
a net. So he bade the servants of his house to devise
fillets and snares, and to set their cunning traps about
the orchard. Not a chestnut tree nor hazel within
the garth but was limed and netted for the caging
of this bird. It was not long therefore ere the nightingale
was taken, and the servants made haste to give
him to the pleasure of their lord. Wondrous merry
was the knight when he held him living in his hand.
He went straightway to the chamber of his dame, and
entering, said,</p>

<p>"Wife, are you within? Come near, for I must speak
with you. Here is the nightingale, all limed and taken,
who made vigil of your sleeping hours. Take now your
rest in peace, for he will never disturb you more."</p>

<p>When the lady understood these words she was
marvellously sorrowful and heavy. She prayed her
lord to grant her the nightingale for a gift. But for
all answer he wrung his neck with both hands so fiercely
that the head was torn from the body. Then, right foully,
he flung the bird upon the knees of the dame, in such
fashion that her breast was sprinkled with the blood.
So he departed, incontinent, from the chamber in a rage.</p>

<p>The lady took the little body in her hands, and wept
his evil fate. She railed on those who with nets and
snares had betrayed the nightingale to his death; for
anger and hate beyond measure had gained hold on
her heart.</p>

<p>"Alas," cried she, "evil is come upon me. Never
again may I rise from my bed in the night, and watch
from the casement, so that I may see my friend. One
thing I know full well, that he will deem my love is no
more set upon him. Woe to her who has none to give
her counsel. This I will do. I will bestow the nightingale
upon him, and send him tidings of the chance that has
befallen."</p>

<p>So this doleful lady took a fair piece of white samite,
broidered with gold, and wrought thereon the whole
story of this adventure. In this silken cloth she wrapped
the body of the little bird, and calling to her a trusty
servant of her house, charged him with the message,
and bade him bear it to her friend. The varlet went
his way to the knight, and having saluted him on the
part of the lady, he told over to him the story, and
bestowed the nightingale upon him. When all had been
rehearsed and shown to him, and he had well considered
the matter, the knight was very dolent; yet in no
wise would he avenge himself wrongfully. So he caused
a certain coffret to be fashioned, made not of iron or steel,
but of fine gold and fair stones, most rich and precious,
right strongly clasped and bound. In this little chest
he set the body of the nightingale, and having sealed
the shrine, carried it upon him whenever his business
took him abroad.</p>

<p>This adventure could not long be hid. Very swiftly
it was noised about the country, and the Breton folk
made a Lay thereon, which they called the Lay of the
Laustic, in their own tongue.</p>





<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title">THE LAY OF SIR LAUNFAL</h2>
<p>I will tell you the story of another Lay. It relates the
adventures of a rich and mighty baron, and the Breton
calls it, the Lay of Sir Launfal.</p>

<p>King Arthur—that fearless knight and courteous
lord—removed to Wales, and lodged at Caerleon-on-Usk,
since the Picts and Scots did much mischief in the land.
For it was the wont of the wild people of the north to
enter in the realm of Logres, and burn and damage
at their will. At the time of Pentecost, the King cried
a great feast. Thereat he gave many rich gifts to his
counts and barons, and to the Knights of the Round
Table. Never were such worship and bounty shown
before at any feast, for Arthur bestowed honours and
lands on all his servants—save only on one. This lord,
who was forgotten and misliked of the King, was
named Launfal. He was beloved by many of the Court,
because of his beauty and prowess, for he was a worthy
knight, open of heart and heavy of hand. These lords,
to whom their comrade was dear, felt little joy to see so
stout a knight misprized. Sir Launfal was son to a King
of high descent, though his heritage was in a distant
land. He was of the King's household, but since Arthur
gave him naught, and he was of too proud a mind to
pray for his due, he had spent all that he had. Right
heavy was Sir Launfal, when he considered these things,
for he knew himself taken in the toils. Gentles, marvel
not overmuch hereat. Ever must the pilgrim go heavily
in a strange land, where there is none to counsel and
direct him in the path.</p>

<p>Now, on a day, Sir Launfal got him on his horse,
that he might take his pleasure for a little. He came
forth from the city, alone, attended by neither servant
nor squire. He went his way through a green mead,
till he stood by a river of clear running water. Sir
Launfal would have crossed this stream, without thought
of pass or ford, but he might not do so, for reason that
his horse was all fearful and trembling. Seeing that he
was hindered in this fashion, Launfal unbitted his steed,
and let him pasture in that fair meadow, where they
had come. Then he folded his cloak to serve him as a
pillow, and lay upon the ground. Launfal lay in great
misease, because of his heavy thoughts, and the discomfort
of his bed. He turned from side to side, and
might not sleep. Now as the knight looked towards
the river he saw two damsels coming towards him;
fairer maidens Launfal had never seen. These two
maidens were richly dressed in kirtles closely laced and
shapen to their persons and wore mantles of a goodly
purple hue. Sweet and dainty were the damsels, alike
in raiment and in face. The elder of these ladies carried
in her hands a basin of pure gold, cunningly wrought
by some crafty smith—very fair and precious was the
cup; and the younger bore a towel of soft white linen.
These maidens turned neither to the right hand nor to
the left, but went directly to the place where Launfal
lay. When Launfal saw that their business was with
him, he stood upon his feet, like a discreet and courteous
gentleman. After they had greeted the knight, one
of the maidens delivered the message with which she
was charged.</p>

<p>"Sir Launfal, my demoiselle, as gracious as she is
fair, prays that you will follow us, her messengers, as
she has a certain word to speak with you. We will
lead you swiftly to her pavilion, for our lady is very
near at hand. If you but lift your eyes you may see
where her tent is spread."</p>

<p>Right glad was the knight to do the bidding of the
maidens. He gave no heed to his horse, but left him
at his provand in the meadow. All his desire was to
go with the damsels, to that pavilion of silk and divers
colours, pitched in so fair a place. Certainly neither
Semiramis in the days of her most wanton power,
nor Octavian, the Emperor of all the West, had so
gracious a covering from sun and rain. Above the tent
was set an eagle of gold, so rich and precious, that none
might count the cost. The cords and fringes thereof were
of silken thread, and the lances which bore aloft the
pavilion were of refined gold. No King on earth might
have so sweet a shelter, not though he gave in fee the
value of his realm. Within this pavilion Launfal came
upon the Maiden. Whiter she was than any altar lily,
and more sweetly flushed than the new born rose in
time of summer heat. She lay upon a bed with napery
and coverlet of richer worth than could be furnished
by a castle's spoil. Very fresh and slender showed the
lady in her vesture of spotless linen. About her person
she had drawn a mantle of ermine, edged with purple
dye from the vats of Alexandria. By reason of the heat
her raiment was unfastened for a little, and her throat
and the rondure of her bosom showed whiter and more
untouched than hawthorn in May. The knight came
before the bed, and stood gazing on so sweet a sight.
The Maiden beckoned him to draw near, and when he had
seated himself at the foot of her couch, spoke her mind.</p>

<p>"Launfal," she said, "fair friend, it is for you that
I have come from my own far land. I bring you my
love. If you are prudent and discreet, as you are goodly
to the view, there is no emperor nor count, nor king,
whose day shall be so filled with riches and with mirth
as yours."</p>

<p>When Launfal heard these words he rejoiced greatly,
for his heart was litten by another's torch.</p>

<p>"Fair lady," he answered, "since it pleases you to
be so gracious, and to dower so graceless a knight with
your love, there is naught that you may bid me do—right
or wrong, evil or good—that I will not do to the
utmost of my power. I will observe your commandment,
and serve in your quarrels. For you I renounce my
father and my father's house. This only I pray, that
I may dwell with you in your lodging, and that you will
never send me from your side."</p>

<p>When the Maiden heard the words of him whom so
fondly she desired to love, she was altogether moved,
and granted him forthwith her heart and her tenderness.
To her bounty she added another gift besides.
Never might Launfal be desirous of aught, but he would
have according to his wish. He might waste and spend
at will and pleasure, but in his purse ever there was to
spare. No more was Launfal sad. Right merry was the
pilgrim, since one had set him on the way, with such
a gift, that the more pennies he bestowed, the more
silver and gold were in his pouch.</p>

<p>But the Maiden had yet a word to say.</p>

<p>"Friend," she said, "hearken to my counsel. I lay this
charge upon you, and pray you urgently, that you tell
not to any man the secret of our love. If you show this
matter, you will lose your friend, for ever and a day.
Never again may you see my face. Never again will
you have seisin of that body, which is now so tender
in your eyes."</p>

<p>Launfal plighted faith, that right strictly he would
observe this commandment. So the Maiden granted him
her kiss and her embrace, and very sweetly in that fair
lodging passed the day till evensong was come.</p>

<p>Right loath was Launfal to depart from the pavilion
at the vesper hour, and gladly would he have stayed,
had he been able, and his lady wished.</p>

<p>"Fair friend," said she, "rise up, for no longer
may you tarry. The hour is come that we must part.
But one thing I have to say before you go. When you
would speak with me I shall hasten to come before
your wish. Well I deem that you will only call your
friend where she may be found without reproach or
shame of men. You may see me at your pleasure; my
voice shall speak softly in your ear at will; but I must
never be known of your comrades, nor must they ever
learn my speech."</p>

<p>Right joyous was Launfal to hear this thing. He
sealed the covenant with a kiss, and stood upon his
feet. Then there entered the two maidens who had led
him to the pavilion, bringing with them rich raiment,
fitting for a knight's apparel. When Launfal had clothed
himself therewith, there seemed no goodlier varlet under
heaven, for certainly he was fair and true. After these
maidens had refreshed him with clear water, and dried
his hands upon the napkin, Launfal went to meat.
His friend sat at table with him, and small will had he
to refuse her courtesy. Very serviceably the damsels
bore the meats, and Launfal and the Maiden ate and
drank with mirth and content. But one dish was more
to the knight's relish than any other. Sweeter than
the dainties within his mouth, was the lady's kiss upon
his lips.</p>

<p>When supper was ended, Launfal rose from table,
for his horse stood waiting without the pavilion. The
destrier was newly saddled and bridled, and showed
proudly in his rich gay trappings. So Launfal kissed,
and bade farewell, and went his way. He rode back
towards the city at a slow pace. Often he checked his
steed, and looked behind him, for he was filled with
amazement, and all bemused concerning this adventure.
In his heart he doubted that it was but a dream. He
was altogether astonished, and knew not what to do.
He feared that pavilion and Maiden alike were from the
realm of faery.</p>

<p>Launfal returned to his lodging, and was greeted by
servitors, clad no longer in ragged raiment. He fared
richly, lay softly, and spent largely, but never knew
how his purse was filled. There was no lord who had
need of a lodging in the town, but Launfal brought him
to his hall, for refreshment and delight. Launfal bestowed
rich gifts. Launfal redeemed the poor captive.
Launfal clothed in scarlet the minstrel. Launfal gave
honour where honour was due. Stranger and friend
alike he comforted at need. So, whether by night or by
day, Launfal lived greatly at his ease. His lady, she
came at will and pleasure, and, for the rest, all was added
unto him.</p>

<p>Now it chanced, the same year, about the feast of St.
John, a company of knights came, for their solace, to
an orchard, beneath that tower where dwelt the Queen.
Together with these lords went Gawain and his cousin,
Yvain the fair. Then said Gawain, that goodly knight,
beloved and dear to all,</p>

<p>"Lords, we do wrong to disport ourselves in this
pleasaunce without our comrade Launfal. It is not well
to slight a prince as brave as he is courteous, and of a
lineage prouder than our own."</p>

<p>Then certain of the lords returned to the city, and
finding Launfal within his hostel, entreated him to
take his pastime with them in that fair meadow. The
Queen looked out from a window in her tower, she and
three ladies of her fellowship. They saw the lords at
their pleasure, and Launfal also, whom well they knew.
So the Queen chose of her Court thirty damsels—the
sweetest of face and most dainty of fashion—and commanded
that they should descend with her to take their
delight in the garden. When the knights beheld this
gay company of ladies come down the steps of the
perron, they rejoiced beyond measure. They hastened
before to lead them by the hand, and said such words
in their ear as were seemly and pleasant to be spoken.
Amongst these merry and courteous lords hasted not
Sir Launfal. He drew apart from the throng, for with
him time went heavily, till he might have clasp and
greeting of his friend. The ladies of the Queen's fellowship
seemed but kitchen wenches to his sight, in comparison
with the loveliness of the maiden. When the
Queen marked Launfal go aside, she went his way,
and seating herself upon the herb, called the knight
before her. Then she opened out her heart.</p>

<p>"Launfal, I have honoured you for long as a worthy
knight, and have praised and cherished you very dearly.
You may receive a queen's whole love, if such be your
care. Be content: he to whom my heart is given,
has small reason to complain him of the alms."</p>

<p>"Lady," answered the knight, "grant me leave to
go, for this grace is not for me. I am the King's man,
and dare not break my troth. Not for the highest
lady in the world, not even for her love, will I set this
reproach upon my lord."</p>

<p>When the Queen heard this, she was full of wrath,
and spoke many hot and bitter words.</p>

<p>"Launfal," she cried, "well I know that you think
little of woman and her love. There are sins more black
that a man may have upon his soul. Traitor you are,
and false. Right evil counsel gave they to my lord,
who prayed him to suffer you about his person. You
remain only for his harm and loss."</p>

<p>Launfal was very dolent to hear this thing. He was
not slow to take up the Queen's glove, and in his haste
spake words that he repented long, and with tears.</p>

<p>"Lady," said he, "I am not of that guild of which
you speak. Neither am I a despiser of woman, since
I love, and am loved, of one who would bear the prize
from all the ladies in the land. Dame, know now and
be persuaded, that she, whom I serve, is so rich in state,
that the very meanest of her maidens, excels you,
Lady Queen, as much in clerkly skill and goodness,
as in sweetness of body and face, and in every
virtue."</p>

<p>The Queen rose straightway to her feet, and fled to
her chamber, weeping. Right wrathful and heavy was
she, because of the words that had besmirched her.
She lay sick upon her bed, from which, she said, she
would never rise, till the King had done her justice,
and righted this bitter wrong. Now the King that day
had taken his pleasure within the woods. He returned
from the chase towards evening, and sought the chamber
of the Queen. When the lady saw him, she sprang from
her bed, and kneeling at his feet, pleaded for grace and
pity. Launfal—she said—had shamed her, since he
required her love. When she had put him by, very
foully had he reviled her, boasting that his love was
already set on a lady, so proud and noble, that her
meanest wench went more richly, and smiled more
sweetly, than the Queen. Thereat the King waxed
marvellously wrathful, and swore a great oath that he
would set Launfal within a fire, or hang him from a
tree, if he could not deny this thing, before his peers.</p>

<p>Arthur came forth from the Queen's chamber, and
called to him three of his lords. These he sent to seek
the knight who so evilly had entreated the Queen.
Launfal, for his part, had returned to his lodging, in
a sad and sorrowful case. He saw very clearly that he
had lost his friend, since he had declared their love to
men. Launfal sat within his chamber, sick and heavy
of thought. Often he called upon his friend, but the
lady would not hear his voice. He bewailed his evil
lot, with tears; for grief he came nigh to swoon; a
hundred times he implored the Maiden that she would
deign to speak with her knight. Then, since the lady
yet refrained from speech, Launfal cursed his hot and
unruly tongue. Very near he came to ending all this
trouble with his knife. Naught he found to do but to
wring his hands, and call upon the Maiden, begging her
to forgive his trespass, and to talk with him again, as
friend to friend.</p>

<p>But little peace is there for him who is harassed by
a King. There came presently to Launfal's hostel those
three barons from the Court. These bade the knight
forthwith to go with them to Arthur's presence, to acquit
him of this wrong against the Queen. Launfal went
forth, to his own deep sorrow. Had any man slain him
on the road, he would have counted him his friend.
He stood before the King, downcast and speechless,
being dumb by reason of that great grief, of which he
showed the picture and image.</p>

<p>Arthur looked upon his captive very evilly.</p>

<p>"Vassal," said he, harshly, "you have done me a
bitter wrong. It was a foul deed to seek to shame me
in this ugly fashion, and to smirch the honour of the
Queen. Is it folly or lightness which leads you to boast
of that lady, the least of whose maidens is fairer, and
goes more richly, than the Queen?"</p>

<p>Launfal protested that never had he set such shame
upon his lord. Word by word he told the tale of how
he denied the Queen, within the orchard. But concerning
that which he had spoken of the lady, he owned the
truth, and his folly. The love of which he bragged was
now lost to him, by his own exceeding fault. He cared
little for his life, and was content to obey the judgment
of the Court.</p>

<p>Right wrathful was the King at Launfal's words.
He conjured his barons to give him such wise counsel
herein, that wrong might be done to none. The lords
did the King's bidding, whether good came of the matter,
or evil. They gathered themselves together, and appointed
a certain day that Launfal should abide the
judgment of his peers. For his part Launfal must give
pledge and surety to his lord, that he would come before
this judgment in his own body. If he might not give
such surety then he should be held captive till the
appointed day. When the lords of the King's household
returned to tell him of their counsel, Arthur demanded
that Launfal should put such pledge in his hand,
as they had said. Launfal was altogether mazed and
bewildered at this judgment, for he had neither friend
nor kindred in the land. He would have been set in
prison, but Gawain came first to offer himself as his
surety, and with him, all the knights of his fellowship.
These gave into the King's hand as pledge, the fiefs and
lands that they held of his Crown. The King having
taken pledges from the sureties, Launfal returned to
his lodging, and with him certain knights of his company.
They blamed him greatly because of his foolish
love, and chastened him grievously by reason of the
sorrow he made before men. Every day they came to
his chamber, to know of his meat and drink, for much
they feared that presently he would become mad.</p>

<p>The lords of the household came together on the day
appointed for this judgment. The King was on his chair,
with the Queen sitting at his side. The sureties brought
Launfal within the hall, and rendered him into the hands
of his peers. Right sorrowful were they because of his
plight. A great company of his fellowship did all that
they were able to acquit him of this charge. When all
was set out, the King demanded the judgment of the
Court, according to the accusation and the answer.
The barons went forth in much trouble and thought to
consider this matter. Many amongst them grieved
for the peril of a good knight in a strange land; others
held that it were well for Launfal to suffer, because of
the wish and malice of their lord. Whilst they were thus
perplexed, the Duke of Cornwall rose in the council,
and said,</p>

<p>"Lords, the King pursues Launfal as a traitor, and
would slay him with the sword, by reason that he
bragged of the beauty of his maiden, and roused the
jealousy of the Queen. By the faith that I owe this
company, none complains of Launfal, save only the
King. For our part we would know the truth of this
business, and do justice between the King and his man.
We would also show proper reverence to our own liege
lord. Now, if it be according to Arthur's will, let us
take oath of Launfal, that he seek this lady, who has
put such strife between him and the Queen. If her
beauty be such as he has told us, the Queen will have
no cause for wrath. She must pardon Launfal for his
rudeness, since it will be plain that he did not speak
out of a malicious heart. Should Launfal fail his word,
and not return with the lady, or should her fairness
fall beneath his boast, then let him be cast off from our
fellowship, and be sent forth from the service of the
King."</p>

<p>This counsel seemed good to the lords of the household.
They sent certain of his friends to Launfal, to acquaint
him with their judgment, bidding him to pray his damsel
to the Court, that he might be acquitted of this blame.
The knight made answer that in no wise could he do
this thing. So the sureties returned before the judges,
saying that Launfal hoped neither for refuge nor for
succour from the lady, and Arthur urged them to a
speedy ending, because of the prompting of the Queen.</p>

<p>The judges were about to give sentence upon Launfal,
when they saw two maidens come riding towards the
palace, upon two white ambling palfreys. Very sweet
and dainty were these maidens, and richly clothed in
garments of crimson sendal, closely girt and fashioned
to their bodies. All men, old and young, looked willingly
upon them, for fair they were to see. Gawain, and three
knights of his company, went straight to Launfal, and
showed him these maidens, praying him to say which
of them was his friend. But he answered never a
word. The maidens dismounted from their palfreys,
and coming before the dais where the King was seated,
spake him fairly, as they were fair.</p>

<p>"Sire, prepare now a chamber, hung with silken
cloths, where it is seemly for my lady to dwell; for she
would lodge with you awhile."</p>

<p>This gift the King granted gladly. He called to him
two knights of his household, and bade them bestow
the maidens in such chambers as were fitting to their
degree. The maidens being gone, the King required
of his barons to proceed with their judgment, saying
that he had sore displeasure at the slowness of the cause.</p>

<p>"Sire," replied the barons, "we rose from Council,
because of the damsels who entered in the hall. We
will at once resume the sitting, and give our judgment
without more delay."</p>

<p>The barons again were gathered together, in much
thought and trouble, to consider this matter. There
was great strife and dissension amongst them, for they
knew not what to do. In the midst of all this noise and
tumult, there came two other damsels riding to the hall
on two Spanish mules. Very richly arrayed were these
damsels in raiment of fine needlework, and their kirtles
were covered by fresh fair mantles, embroidered with
gold. Great joy had Launfal's comrades when they
marked these ladies. They said between themselves
that doubtless they came for the succour of the good
knight. Gawain, and certain of his company, made
haste to Launfal, and said,
"Sir, be not cast down. Two ladies are near at
hand, right dainty of dress, and gracious of person.
Tell us truly, for the love of God, is one of these your
friend?"</p>

<p>But Launfal answered very simply that never before
had he seen these damsels with his eyes, nor known and
loved them in his heart.</p>

<p>The maidens dismounted from their mules, and
stood before Arthur, in the sight of all. Greatly were
they praised of many, because of their beauty, and of
the colour of their face and hair. Some there were who
deemed already that the Queen was overborne.</p>

<p>The elder of the damsels carried herself modestly
and well, and sweetly told over the message wherewith
she was charged.</p>

<p>"Sire, make ready for us chambers, where we may
abide with our lady, for even now she comes to speak
with thee."</p>

<p>The King commanded that the ladies should be led
to their companions, and bestowed in the same honourable
fashion as they. Then he bade the lords of his
household to consider their judgment, since he would
endure no further respite. The Court already had given
too much time to the business, and the Queen was
growing wrathful, because of the blame that was hers.
Now the judges were about to proclaim their sentence,
when, amidst the tumult of the town, there came riding
to the palace the flower of all the ladies of the world.
She came mounted upon a palfrey, white as snow,
which carried her softly, as though she loved her burthen.
Beneath the sky was no goodlier steed, nor one more
gentle to the hand. The harness of the palfrey was so
rich, that no king on earth might hope to buy trappings
so precious, unless he sold or set his realm in pledge.
The Maiden herself showed such as I will tell you.
Passing slim was the lady, sweet of bodice and slender
of girdle. Her throat was whiter than snow on branch,
and her eyes were like flowers in the pallor of her face.
She had a witching mouth, a dainty nose, and an open
brow. Her eyebrows were brown, and her golden hair
parted in two soft waves upon her head. She was clad
in a shift of spotless linen, and above her snowy kirtle
was set a mantle of royal purple, clasped upon her breast.
She carried a hooded falcon upon her glove, and a greyhound
followed closely after. As the Maiden rode at a
slow pace through the streets of the city, there was
none, neither great nor small, youth nor sergeant, but
ran forth from his house, that he might content his
heart with so great beauty. Every man that saw her
with his eyes, marvelled at a fairness beyond that of
any earthly woman. Little he cared for any mortal
maiden, after he had seen this sight. The friends of
Sir Launfal hastened to the knight, to tell him of his
lady's succour, if so it were according to God's will.</p>

<p>"Sir comrade, truly is not this your friend? This
lady is neither black nor golden, mean nor tall. She is
only the most lovely thing in all the world."</p>

<p>When Launfal heard this, he sighed, for by their
words he knew again his friend. He raised his head,
and as the blood rushed to his face, speech flowed from
his lips.</p>

<p>"By my faith," cried he, "yes, she is indeed my
friend. It is a small matter now whether men slay me,
or set me free; for I am made whole of my hurt just
by looking on her face."</p>

<p>The Maiden entered in the palace—where none so
fair had come before—and stood before the King, in
the presence of his household. She loosed the clasp
of her mantle, so that men might the more easily perceive
the grace of her person. The courteous King
advanced to meet her, and all the Court got them on
their feet, and pained themselves in her service. When
the lords had gazed upon her for a space, and praised
the sum of her beauty, the lady spake to Arthur in this
fashion, for she was anxious to begone.</p>

<p>"Sire, I have loved one of thy vassals,—the knight
who stands in bonds, Sir Launfal. He was always
misprized in thy Court, and his every action turned to
blame. What he said, that thou knowest; for over
hasty was his tongue before the Queen. But he never
craved her in love, however loud his boasting. I cannot
choose that he should come to hurt or harm by me.
In the hope of freeing Launfal from his bonds, I have
obeyed thy summons. Let now thy barons look boldly
upon my face, and deal justly in this quarrel between
the Queen and me."</p>

<p>The King commanded that this should be done, and
looking upon her eyes, not one of the judges but was
persuaded that her favour exceeded that of the Queen.</p>

<p>Since then Launfal had not spoken in malice against
his lady, the lords of the household gave him again his
sword. When the trial had come thus to an end the
Maiden took her leave of the King, and made her ready
to depart. Gladly would Arthur have had her lodge
with him for a little, and many a lord would have rejoiced
in her service, but she might not tarry. Now without
the hall stood a great stone of dull marble, where it
was the wont of lords, departing from the Court, to
climb into the saddle, and Launfal by the stone. The
Maiden came forth from the doors of the palace, and
mounting on the stone, seated herself on the palfrey,
behind her friend. Then they rode across the plain
together, and were no more seen.</p>

<p>The Bretons tell that the knight was ravished by
his lady to an island, very dim and very fair, known
as Avalon. But none has had speech with Launfal and
his faery love since then, and for my part I can tell
you no more of the matter.</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title">THE LAY OF THE TWO LOVERS</h2>

<p>Once upon a time there lived in Normandy two lovers,
who were passing fond, and were brought by Love to
Death. The story of their love was bruited so abroad,
that the Bretons made a song in their own tongue,
and named this song the Lay of the Two Lovers.</p>

<p>In Neustria—that men call Normandy—there is
verily a high and marvellously great mountain, where
lie the relics of the Two Children. Near this high place
the King of those parts caused to be built a certain fair
and cunning city, and since he was lord of the Pistrians,
it was known as Pistres. The town yet endures, with
its towers and houses, to bear witness to the truth;
moreover the country thereabouts is known to us all
as the Valley of Pistres.</p>

<p>This King had one fair daughter, a damsel sweet of
face and gracious of manner, very near to her father's
heart, since he had lost his Queen. The maiden increased
in years and favour, but he took no heed to her trothing,
so that men—yea, even his own people—blamed him
greatly for this thing. When the King heard thereof
he was passing heavy and dolent, and considered within
himself how he might be delivered from this grief. So
then, that none should carry off his child, he caused
it to be proclaimed, both far and near, by script and trumpet,
that he alone should wed the maid, who would bear
her in his arms, to the pinnacle of the great and perilous
mountain, and that without rest or stay. When this
news was noised about the country, many came upon
the quest. But strive as they would they might not
enforce themselves more than they were able. However
mighty they were of body, at the last they failed upon
the mountain, and fell with their burthen to the ground.
Thus, for a while, was none so bold as to seek the high
Princess.</p>

<p>Now in this country lived a squire, son to a certain
count of that realm, seemly of semblance and courteous,
and right desirous to win that prize, which was so
coveted of all. He was a welcome guest at the Court,
and the King talked with him very willingly. This
squire had set his heart upon the daughter of the King,
and many a time spoke in her ear, praying her to give
him again the love he had bestowed upon her. So
seeing him brave and courteous, she esteemed him for
the gifts which gained him the favour of the King,
and they loved together in their youth. But they
hid this matter from all about the Court. This thing
was very grievous to them, but the damoiseau thought
within himself that it were good to bear the pains he
knew, rather than to seek out others that might prove
sharper still. Yet in the end, altogether distraught by
love, this prudent varlet sought his friend, and showed
her his case, saying that he urgently required of her
that she would flee with him, for no longer could he
endure the weariness of his days. Should he ask her
of the King, well he knew that by reason of his love he
would refuse the gift, save he bore her in his arms up
the steep mount. Then the maiden made answer to
her lover, and said,</p>

<p>"Fair friend, well I know you may not carry me to
that high place. Moreover should we take to flight,
my father would suffer wrath and sorrow beyond
measure, and go heavily all his days. Certainly my love
is too fond to plague him thus, and we must seek another
counsel, for this is not to my heart. Hearken well.
I have kindred in Salerno, of rich estate. For more
than thirty years my aunt has studied there the art
of medicine, and knows the secret gift of every root
and herb. If you hasten to her, bearing letters from
me, and show her your adventure, certainly she will
find counsel and cure. Doubt not that she will discover
some cunning simple, that will strengthen your body,
as well as comfort your heart. Then return to this
realm with your potion, and ask me at my father's
hand. He will deem you but a stripling, and set forth
the terms of his bargain, that to him alone shall I be
given who knows how to climb the perilous mountain,
without pause or rest, bearing his lady between his
arms."</p>

<p>When the varlet heard this cunning counsel of the
maiden, he rejoiced greatly, and thanking her sweetly
for her rede, craved permission to depart. He returned
to his own home, and gathering together a goodly store
of silken cloths most precious, he bestowed his gear
upon the pack horses, and made him ready for the road.
So with a little company of men, mounted on swift
palfreys, and most privy to his mind, he arrived at
Salerno. Now the squire made no long stay at his
lodging, but as soon as he might, went to the damsel's
kindred to open out his mind. He delivered to the
aunt the letters he carried from his friend, and bewailed
their evil case. When the dame had read these letters
with him, line by line, she charged him to lodge with
her awhile, till she might do according to his wish.
So by her sorceries, and for the love of her maid, she
brewed such a potion that no man, however wearied
and outworn, but by drinking this philtre, would not
be refreshed in heart and blood and bones. Such virtue
had this medicine, directly it were drunken. This simple
she poured within a little flacket, and gave it to the
varlet, who received the gift with great joy and delight,
and returned swiftly to his own land.</p>

<p>The varlet made no long sojourn in his home. He
repaired straightway to the Court, and, seeking out the
King, required of him his fair daughter in marriage,
promising, for his part, that were she given him, he
would bear her in his arms to the summit of the mount.
The King was no wise wrath at his presumption. He
smiled rather at his folly, for how should one so young
and slender succeed in a business wherein so many
mighty men had failed. Therefore he appointed a
certain day for this judgment. Moreover he caused letters
to be written to his vassals and his friends—passing
none by—bidding them to see the end of this adventure.
Yea, with public cry and sound of trumpet he bade all
who would, come to behold the stripling carry his fair
daughter to the pinnacle of the mountain. And from
every region round about men came to learn the issue
of this thing. But for her part the fair maiden did all
that she was able to bring her love to a good end. Ever
was it fast day and fleshless day with her, so that by
any means she might lighten the burthen that her
friend must carry in his arms.</p>

<p>Now on the appointed day this young dansellon came
very early to the appointed place, bringing the flacket
with him. When the great company were fully met
together, the King led forth his daughter before them;
and all might see that she was arrayed in nothing but
her smock. The varlet took the maiden in his arms,
but first he gave her the flask with the precious brewage
to carry, since for pride he might not endure to drink
therefrom, save at utmost peril. The squire set forth
at a great pace, and climbed briskly till he was halfway
up the mount. Because of the joy he had in
clasping his burthen, he gave no thought to the
potion. But she—she knew the strength was failing in
his heart.</p>

<p>"Fair friend," said she, "well I know that you tire:
drink now, I pray you, of the flacket, and so shall your
manhood come again at need."</p>

<p>But the varlet answered,</p>

<p>"Fair love, my heart is full of courage; nor for any
reason will I pause, so long as I can hold upon my way.
It is the noise of all this folk—the tumult and the
shouting—that makes my steps uncertain. Their cries
distress me, I do not dare to stand."</p>

<p>But when two thirds of the course was won, the grasshopper
would have tripped him off his feet. Urgently
and often the maiden prayed him, saying,</p>

<p>"Fair friend, drink now of thy cordial."</p>

<p>But he would neither hear, nor give credence to her
words. A mighty anguish filled his bosom. He climbed
upon the summit of the mountain, and pained himself
grievously to bring his journey to an end. This he might
not do. He reeled and fell, nor could he rise again, for
the heart had burst within his breast.</p>

<p>When the maiden saw her lover's piteous plight, she
deemed that he had swooned by reason of his pain.
She kneeled hastily at his side, and put the enchanted
brewage to his lips, but he could neither drink nor speak,
for he was dead, as I have told you. She bewailed his
evil lot, with many shrill cries, and flung the useless
flacket far away. The precious potion bestrewed the
ground, making a garden of that desolate place. For
many saving herbs have been found there since that day
by the simple folk of that country, which from the
magic philtre derived all their virtue.</p>

<p>But when the maiden knew that her lover was dead,
she made such wondrous sorrow, as no man had ever
seen. She kissed his eyes and mouth, and falling upon
his body, took him in her arms, and pressed him closely
to her breast. There was no heart so hard as not to
be touched by her sorrow; for in this fashion died a
dame, who was fair and sweet and gracious, beyond
the wont of the daughters of men.</p>

<p>Now the King and his company, since these two
lovers came not again, presently climbed the mountain
to learn their end. But when the King came upon
them lifeless, and fast in that embrace, incontinent he
fell to the ground, bereft of sense. After his speech
had returned to him, he was passing heavy, and lamented
their doleful case, and thus did all his people with him.</p>

<p>Three days they kept the bodies of these two fair
children from earth, with uncovered face. On the
third day they sealed them fast in a goodly coffin of
marble, and by the counsel of all men, laid them softly
to rest on that mountain where they died. Then they
departed from them, and left them together, alone.</p>

<p>Since this adventure of the Two Children this hill
is known as the Mountain of the Two Lovers, and their
story being bruited abroad, the Breton folk have made
a Lay thereof, even as I have rehearsed before you.</p>





<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title">THE LAY OF THE WERE-WOLF</h2>

<p>Amongst the tales I tell you once again, I would not
forget the Lay of the Were-Wolf. Such beasts as he are
known in every land. Bisclavaret he is named in
Brittany; whilst the Norman calls him Garwal.</p>

<p>It is a certain thing, and within the knowledge of
all, that many a christened man has suffered this change,
and ran wild in woods, as a Were-Wolf. The Were-Wolf
is a fearsome beast. He lurks within the thick
forest, mad and horrible to see. All the evil that he
may, he does. He goeth to and fro, about the solitary
place, seeking man, in order to devour him. Hearken,
now, to the adventure of the Were-Wolf, that I have
to tell.</p>

<p>In Brittany there dwelt a baron who was marvellously
esteemed of all his fellows. He was a stout knight, and
a comely, and a man of office and repute. Right
private was he to the mind of his lord, and dear to the
counsel of his neighbours. This baron was wedded
to a very worthy dame, right fair to see, and sweet of
semblance. All his love was set on her, and all her love
was given again to him. One only grief had this lady.
For three whole days in every week her lord was absent
from her side. She knew not where he went, nor on
what errand. Neither did any of his house know the
business which called him forth.</p>

<p>On a day when this lord was come again to his house,
altogether joyous and content, the lady took him to
task, right sweetly, in this fashion,
"Husband," said she, "and fair, sweet friend, I have
a certain thing to pray of you. Right willingly would I
receive this gift, but I fear to anger you in the asking.
It is better for me to have an empty hand, than to gain
hard words."</p>

<p>When the lord heard this matter, he took the lady
in his arms, very tenderly, and kissed her.</p>

<p>"Wife," he answered, "ask what you will. What
would you have, for it is yours already?"</p>

<p>"By my faith," said the lady, "soon shall I be
whole. Husband, right long and wearisome are the
days that you spend away from your home. I rise
from my bed in the morning, sick at heart, I know
not why. So fearful am I, lest you do aught to
your loss, that I may not find any comfort. Very
quickly shall I die for reason of my dread. Tell me
now, where you go, and on what business! How may
the knowledge of one who loves so closely, bring you
to harm?"</p>

<p>"Wife," made answer the lord, "nothing but evil
can come if I tell you this secret. For the mercy of
God do not require it of me. If you but knew, you
would withdraw yourself from my love, and I should be
lost indeed."</p>

<p>When the lady heard this, she was persuaded that
her baron sought to put her by with jesting words.
Therefore she prayed and required him the more urgently,
with tender looks and speech, till he was overborne, and
told her all the story, hiding naught.</p>

<p>"Wife, I become Bisclavaret. I enter in the forest,
and live on prey and roots, within the thickest of the
wood."</p>

<p>After she had learned his secret, she prayed and
entreated the more as to whether he ran in his raiment,
or went spoiled of vesture.</p>

<p>"Wife," said he, "I go naked as a beast."</p>

<p>"Tell me, for hope of grace, what you do with your
clothing?"</p>

<p>"Fair wife, that will I never. If I should lose my
raiment, or even be marked as I quit my vesture,
then a Were-Wolf I must go for all the days of my life.
Never again should I become man, save in that hour
my clothing were given back to me. For this reason
never will I show my lair."</p>

<p>"Husband," replied the lady to him, "I love you
better than all the world. The less cause have you for
doubting my faith, or hiding any tittle from me. What
savour is here of friendship? How have I made forfeit
of your love; for what sin do you mistrust my honour?
Open now your heart, and tell what is good to be
known."</p>

<p>So at the end, outwearied and overborne by her
importunity, he could no longer refrain, but told her all.</p>

<p>"Wife," said he, "within this wood, a little from
the path, there is a hidden way, and at the end thereof
an ancient chapel, where oftentimes I have bewailed my
lot. Near by is a great hollow stone, concealed by a
bush, and there is the secret place where I hide my
raiment, till I would return to my own home."</p>

<p>On hearing this marvel the lady became sanguine of
visage, because of her exceeding fear. She dared no
longer to lie at his side, and turned over in her mind,
this way and that, how best she could get her from him.
Now there was a certain knight of those parts, who, for
a great while, had sought and required this lady for
her love. This knight had spent long years in her service,
but little enough had he got thereby, not even fair
words, or a promise. To him the dame wrote a letter,
and meeting, made her purpose plain.</p>

<p>"Fair friend," said she, "be happy. That which
you have coveted so long a time, I will grant without
delay. Never again will I deny your suit. My heart,
and all I have to give, are yours, so take me now as
love and dame."</p>

<p>Right sweetly the knight thanked her for her grace,
and pledged her faith and fealty. When she had confirmed
him by an oath, then she told him all this business
of her lord—why he went, and what he became, and
of his ravening within the wood. So she showed him
of the chapel, and of the hollow stone, and of how to
spoil the Were-Wolf of his vesture. Thus, by the kiss
of his wife, was Bisclavaret betrayed. Often enough
had he ravished his prey in desolate places, but from
this journey he never returned. His kinsfolk and
acquaintance came together to ask of his tidings, when
this absence was noised abroad. Many a man, on many
a day, searched the woodland, but none might find him,
nor learn where Bisclavaret was gone.</p>

<p>The lady was wedded to the knight who had cherished
her for so long a space. More than a year had passed
since Bisclavaret disappeared. Then it chanced that
the King would hunt in that self-same wood where the
Were-Wolf lurked. When the hounds were unleashed
they ran this way and that, and swiftly came upon his
scent. At the view the huntsman winded on his horn,
and the whole pack were at his heels. They followed
him from morn to eve, till he was torn and bleeding,
and was all adread lest they should pull him down.
Now the King was very close to the quarry, and when
Bisclavaret looked upon his master, he ran to him for pity
and for grace. He took the stirrup within his paws,
and fawned upon the prince's foot. The King was very
fearful at this sight, but presently he called his courtiers
to his aid.</p>

<p>"Lords," cried he, "hasten hither, and see this marvellous
thing. Here is a beast who has the sense of
man. He abases himself before his foe, and cries for
mercy, although he cannot speak. Beat off the hounds,
and let no man do him harm. We will hunt no more
to-day, but return to our own place, with the wonderful
quarry we have taken."</p>

<p>The King turned him about, and rode to his hall,
Bisclavaret following at his side. Very near to his
master the Were-Wolf went, like any dog, and had no
care to seek again the wood. When the King had brought
him safely to his own castle, he rejoiced greatly, for
the beast was fair and strong, no mightier had any man
seen. Much pride had the King in his marvellous beast.
He held him so dear, that he bade all those who wished
for his love, to cross the Wolf in naught, neither to
strike him with a rod, but ever to see that he was richly
fed and kennelled warm. This commandment the Court
observed willingly. So all the day the Wolf sported
with the lords, and at night he lay within the chamber
of the King. There was not a man who did not make
much of the beast, so frank was he and debonair. None
had reason to do him wrong, for ever was he about his
master, and for his part did evil to none. Every day
were these two companions together, and all perceived
that the King loved him as his friend.</p>

<p>Hearken now to that which chanced.</p>

<p>The King held a high Court, and bade his great vassals
and barons, and all the lords of his venery to the feast.
Never was there a goodlier feast, nor one set forth with
sweeter show and pomp. Amongst those who were
bidden, came that same knight who had the wife of
Bisclavaret for dame. He came to the castle, richly
gowned, with a fair company, but little he deemed
whom he would find so near. Bisclavaret marked his
foe the moment he stood within the hall. He ran
towards him, and seized him with his fangs, in the
King's very presence, and to the view of all. Doubtless
he would have done him much mischief, had not the
King called and chidden him, and threatened him with a
rod. Once, and twice, again, the Wolf set upon the
knight in the very light of day. All men marvelled at
his malice, for sweet and serviceable was the beast,
and to that hour had shown hatred of none. With one
consent the household deemed that this deed was done
with full reason, and that the Wolf had suffered at the
knight's hand some bitter wrong. Right wary of his
foe was the knight until the feast had ended, and all
the barons had taken farewell of their lord, and departed,
each to his own house. With these, amongst the very
first, went that lord whom Bisclavaret so fiercely had
assailed. Small was the wonder that he was glad to go.</p>

<p>No long while after this adventure it came to pass
that the courteous King would hunt in that forest where
Bisclavaret was found. With the prince came his wolf,
and a fair company. Now at nightfall the King abode
within a certain lodge of that country, and this was
known of that dame who before was the wife of Bisclavaret.
In the morning the lady clothed her in her
most dainty apparel, and hastened to the lodge, since
she desired to speak with the King, and to offer him
a rich present. When the lady entered in the chamber,
neither man nor leash might restrain the fury of the Wolf.
He became as a mad dog in his hatred and malice.
Breaking from his bonds he sprang at the lady's face,
and bit the nose from her visage. From every side
men ran to the succour of the dame. They beat off
the wolf from his prey, and for a little would have cut
him in pieces with their swords. But a certain wise
counsellor said to the King,</p>

<p>"Sire, hearken now to me. This beast is always
with you, and there is not one of us all who has not
known him for long. He goes in and out amongst us,
nor has molested any man, neither done wrong or felony
to any, save only to this dame, one only time as we have
seen. He has done evil to this lady, and to that knight,
who is now the husband of the dame. Sire, she was
once the wife of that lord who was so close and private
to your heart, but who went, and none might find where
he had gone. Now, therefore, put the dame in a sure
place, and question her straitly, so that she may tell—if
perchance she knows thereof—for what reason this
Beast holds her in such mortal hate. For many a strange
deed has chanced, as well we know, in this marvellous
land of Brittany."</p>

<p>The King listened to these words, and deemed the
counsel good. He laid hands upon the knight, and put
the dame in surety in another place. He caused them
to be questioned right straitly, so that their torment
was very grievous. At the end, partly because of her
distress, and partly by reason of her exceeding fear,
the lady's lips were loosed, and she told her tale. She
showed them of the betrayal of her lord, and how his
raiment was stolen from the hollow stone. Since then
she knew not where he went, nor what had befallen
him, for he had never come again to his own land.
Only, in her heart, well she deemed and was persuaded,
that Bisclavaret was he.</p>

<p>Straightway the King demanded the vesture of his
baron, whether this were to the wish of the lady, or
whether it were against her wish. When the raiment
was brought him, he caused it to be spread before
Bisclavaret, but the Wolf made as though he had not
seen. Then that cunning and crafty counsellor took
the King apart, that he might give him a fresh rede.</p>

<p>"Sire," said he, "you do not wisely, nor well, to
set this raiment before Bisclavaret, in the sight of all.
In shame and much tribulation must he lay aside the
beast, and again become man. Carry your wolf within
your most secret chamber, and put his vestment therein.
Then close the door upon him, and leave him alone for
a space. So we shall see presently whether the ravening
beast may indeed return to human shape."</p>

<p>The King carried the Wolf to his chamber, and shut
the doors upon him fast. He delayed for a brief while,
and taking two lords of his fellowship with him, came
again to the room. Entering therein, all three, softly
together, they found the knight sleeping in the King's
bed, like a little child. The King ran swiftly to the bed
and taking his friend in his arms, embraced and kissed
him fondly, above a hundred times. When man's speech
returned once more, he told him of his adventure.
Then the King restored to his friend the fief that was
stolen from him, and gave such rich gifts, moreover, as
I cannot tell. As for the wife who had betrayed
Bisclavaret, he bade her avoid his country, and chased
her from the realm. So she went forth, she and her second
lord together, to seek a more abiding city, and were no
more seen.</p>

<p>The adventure that you have heard is no vain fable.
Verily and indeed it chanced as I have said. The Lay
of the Were-Wolf, truly, was written that it should ever
be borne in mind.</p>





<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title">THE LAY OF THE ASH TREE</h2>

<p>Now will I tell you the Lay of the Ash Tree, according
to the story that I know.</p>

<p>In ancient days there dwelt two knights in Brittany,
who were neighbours and close friends. These two
lords were brave and worthy gentlemen, rich in goods
and lands, and near both in heart and home. Moreover
each was wedded to a dame. One of these ladies was
with child, and when her time was come, she was
delivered of two boys. Her husband was right happy
and content. For the joy that was his, he sent messages
to his neighbour, telling that his wife had brought forth
two sons, and praying that one of them might be
christened with his name. The rich man was at meat
when the messenger came before him. The servitor
kneeled before the dais, and told his message in his ear.
The lord thanked God for the happiness that had befallen
his friend, and bestowed a fair horse on the bringer of
good tidings. His wife, sitting at board with her husband,
heard the story of the messenger, and smiled
at his news. Proud she was, and sly, with an envious
heart, and a rancorous tongue. She made no effort
to bridle her lips, but spoke lightly before the servants
of the house, and said,</p>

<p>"I marvel greatly that so reputable a man as our
neighbour, should publish his dishonour to my lord.
It is a shameful thing for any wife to have two children
at a birth. We all know that no woman brings forth
two at one bearing, except two husbands have aided her
therein."</p>

<p>Her husband looked upon her in silence for awhile,
and when he spoke it was to blame her very sternly.</p>

<p>"Wife," he said, "be silent. It is better to be dumb,
than to utter such words as these. As you know well,
there is not a breath to tarnish this lady's good name."</p>

<p>The folk of the house, who listened to these words,
stored them in their hearts, and told abroad the tale,
spoken by their lady. Very soon it was known throughout
Brittany. Greatly was the lady blamed for her evil
tongue, and not a woman who heard thereof—whether
she were rich or poor—but who scorned her for her malice.
The servant who carried the message, on his return
repeated to his lord of what he had seen and heard.
Passing heavy was the knight, and knew not what to
do. He doubted his own true wife, and suspected her
the more sorely, because she had done naught that was
in any way amiss.</p>

<p>The lady, who so foully slandered her fellow, fell
with child in the same year. Her neighbour was avenged
upon her, for when her term was come, she became the
mother of two daughters. Sick at heart was she. She
was right sorrowful, and lamented her evil case.</p>

<p>"Alas," she said, "what shall I do, for I am dishonoured
for all my days. Shamed I am, it is the simple
truth. When my lord and his kinsfolk shall hear of
what has chanced, they will never believe me a stainless
wife. They will remember how I judged all women in
my plight. They will recall how I said before my house,
that my neighbour could not have been doubly a mother,
unless she had first been doubly a wife. I have the best
reason now to know that I was wrong, and I am caught
in my own snare. She who digs a pit for another,
cannot tell that she may not fall into the hole herself.
If you wish to speak loudly concerning your neighbour,
it is best to say nothing of him but in praise. The only
way to keep me from shame, is that one of my children
should die. It is a great sin; but I would rather trust
to the mercy of God, than suffer scorn and reproach for
the rest of my life."</p>

<p>The women about her comforted her as best they
might in this trouble. They told her frankly that they
would not suffer such wrong to be done, since the slaying
of a child was not reckoned a jest. The lady had a
maiden near her person, whom she had long held and
nourished. The damsel was a freeman's daughter, and
was greatly loved and cherished of her mistress. When
she saw the lady's tears, and heard the bitterness of
her complaint, anguish went to her heart, like a knife.
She stooped over her lady, striving to bring her comfort.</p>

<p>"Lady," she said, "take it not so to heart. Give
over this grief, for all will yet be well. You shall deliver
me one of these children, and I will put her so far from
you, that you shall never see her again, nor know shame
because of her. I will carry her safe and sound to the
door of a church. There I will lay her down. Some
honest man shall find her, and—please God—will be
at the cost of her nourishing."</p>

<p>Great joy had the lady to hear these words. She
promised the maiden that in recompense of her service,
she would grant her such guerdon as she should wish.
The maiden took the babe—yet smiling in her sleep—and
wrapped her in a linen cloth. Above this she set
a piece of sanguine silk, brought by the husband of
this dame from a bazaar in Constantinople—fairer was
never seen. With a silken lace they bound a great ring
to the child's arm. This ring was of fine gold, weighing
fully an ounce, and was set with garnets most precious.</p>

<p>Letters were graven thereon, so that those who found the
maid might understand that she came of a good house.
The damsel took the child, and went out from the
chamber. When night was come, and all was still, she
left the town, and sought the high road leading through
the forest. She held on her way, clasping the baby
to her breast, till from afar, to her right hand, she
heard the howling of dogs and the crowing of cocks.
She deemed that she was near a town, and went the
lighter for the hope, directing her steps, there, whence
the noises came. Presently the damsel entered in a fair
city, where was an Abbey, both great and rich. This
Abbey was worshipfully ordered, with many nuns in
their office and degree, and an Abbess in charge of all.
The maiden gazed upon the mighty house, and considered
its towers and walls, and the church with its
belfry. She went swiftly to the door, and setting the
child upon the ground, kneeled humbly to make her
prayer.</p>

<p>"Lord," said she, "for the sake of Thy Holy Name,
if such be Thy will, preserve this child from death."</p>

<p>Her petition ended, the maiden looked about her,
and saw an ash tree, planted to give shadow in a sunny
place. It was a fair tree, thick and leafy, and was
divided into four strong branches. The maiden took
the child again in her arms, and running to the ash,
set her within the tree. There she left her, commending
her to the care of God. So she returned to her mistress,
and told her all that she had done.</p>

<p>Now in this Abbey was a porter, whose duty it was
to open the doors of the church, before folk came to
hear the service of God. This night he rose at his
accustomed hour, lighted candles and lamps, rang the
bells, and set wide the doors. His eyes fell upon the
silken stuff within the ash. He thought at first that some
bold thief had hidden his spoil within the tree. He felt
with his hand to discover what it might be, and found
that it was a little child. The porter praised God for
His goodness; he took the babe, and going again to his
house, called to his daughter, who was a widow, with an
infant yet in the cradle.</p>

<p>"Daughter," he cried, "get from bed at once; light
your candle, and kindle the fire. I bring you a little
child, whom I have found within our ash. Take her
to your breast; cherish her against the cold, and bathe
her in warm water."</p>

<p>The widow did according to her father's will. She
kindled a fire, and taking the babe, washed and cherished
her in her need. Very certain she was, when she saw
that rich stuff of crimson samite, and the golden ring
about the arm, that the girl was come of an honourable
race. The next day, when the office was ended, the
porter prayed the Abbess that he might have speech
with her as she left the church. He related his story,
and told of the finding of the child. The Abbess bade
him to fetch the child, dressed in such fashion as she
was discovered in the ash. The porter returned to his.
house, and showed the babe right gladly to his dame.
The Abbess observed the infant closely, and said that
she would be at the cost of her nourishing, and would
cherish her as a sister's child. She commanded the
porter strictly to forget that he took her from the ash.
In this manner it chanced that the maiden was tended
of the Abbess. The lady considered the maid as her
niece, and since she was taken from the ash, gave her
the name of Frêne. By this name she was known of all,
within the Abbey precincts, where she was nourished.</p>

<p>When Frêne came to that age in which a girl turns to
woman, there was no fairer maiden in Brittany, nor
so sweet a damsel. Frank, she was, and open, but
discreet in semblance and in speech. To see her was to
love her, and to prize her smile above the beauty of
the world. Now at Dol there lived a lord of whom much
good was spoken. I will tell you his name. The folk
of his country called him Buron. This lord heard speak
of the maiden, and began to love her, for the sweetness
men told of her. As he rode home from some tournament,
he passed near the convent, and prayed the Abbess
that he might look upon her niece. The Abbess gave
him his desire. Greatly was the maiden to his mind.
Very fair he found her, sweetly schooled and fashioned,
modest and courteous to all. If he might not win her
to his love, he counted himself the more forlorn. This
lord was at his wits end, for he knew not what to do.
If he repaired often to the convent, the Abbess would
consider of the cause of his comings, and he would never
again see the maiden with his eyes. One thing only
gave him a little hope. Should he endow the Abbey
of his wealth, he would make it his debtor for ever.
In return he might ask a little room, where he might
abide to have their fellowship, and, at times, withdraw
him from the world. This he did. He gave richly of
his goods to the Abbey. Often, in return, he went to
the convent, but for other reasons than for penitence
and peace. He besought the maiden, and with prayers
and promises, persuaded her to set upon him her love.
When this lord was assured that she loved him, on a
certain day he reasoned with her in this manner.</p>

<p>"Fair friend," said he, "since you have given me
your love, come with me, where I can cherish you
before all the world. You know, as well as I, that if
your aunt should perceive our friendship, she would
be passing wrath, and grieve beyond measure. If my
counsel seems good, let us flee together, you with me,
and I with you. Certes, you shall never have cause to
regret your trust, and of my riches you shall have the
half."</p>

<p>When she who loved so fondly heard these words,
she granted of her tenderness what it pleased him to
have, and followed after where he would. Frêne fled
to her lover's castle, carrying with her that silken cloth
and ring, which might do her service on a day. These
the Abbess had given her again, telling her how one
morning at prime she was found upon an ash, this
ring and samite her only wealth, since she was not her
niece. Right carefully had Frêne guarded her treasure
from that hour. She shut them closely in a little chest,
and this coffret she bore with her in her flight, for she
would neither lose them nor forget.</p>

<p>The lord, with whom the maiden fled, loved and
cherished her very dearly. Of all the men and servants
of his house, there was not one—either great or small—but
who loved and honoured her for her simplicity.
They lived long together in love and content, till the
fair days passed, and trouble came upon this lord. The
knights of his realm drew together, and many a time
urged that he should put away his friend, and wed with
some rich gentlewoman. They would be joyous if a
son were born, to come after to his fief and heritage.
The peril was too great to suffer that he remained a
bachelor, and without an heir. Never more would
they hold him as lord, or serve him with a good heart,
if he would not do according to their will.</p>

<p>There being naught else to do, the lord deferred to
this counsel of his knights, and begged them to name
the lady whom he needs must wed.</p>

<p>"Sir," answered they, "there is a lord of these parts,
privy to our counsel, who has but one child, a maid,
his only heir. Broad lands will he give as her dowry.
This damsel's name is Coudre, and in all this country
there is none so fair. Be advised: throw away the
ash rod you carry, and take the hazel as your staff.<a name="FNanchor1"/><a href="#Footnote_1"><sup>[1]</sup></a>
The ash is a barren stock; but the hazel is thick with
nuts and delight. We shall be content if you take this
maiden as your wife, so it be to the will of God, and
she be given you of her kinsfolk."</p>

<p>Buron demanded the hand of the lady in marriage,
and her father and kin betrothed her to the lord. Alas!
it was hid from all, that these two were twin sisters.
It was Frêne's lot to be doubly abandoned, and to see
her lover become her sister's husband. When she
learned that her friend purposed taking to himself a
wife, she made no outcry against his falseness. She
continued to serve her lord faithfully, and was diligent
in the business of his house. The sergeant and the varlet
were marvellously wrathful, when they knew that she
must go from amongst them. On the day appointed for
the marriage, Buron bade his friends and acquaintance
to the feast. Together with these came the Archbishop,
and those of Dol who held of him their lands. His
betrothed was brought to his home by her mother.
Great dread had the mother because of Frêne, for she
knew of the love that the lord bore the maiden, and
feared lest her daughter should be a stranger in her own
hall. She spoke to her son-in-law, counselling him to
send Frêne from his house, and to find her an honest
man for her husband. Thus there would be quittance
between them. Very splendid was the feast. Whilst
all was mirth and jollity, the damsel visited the chambers,
to see that each was ordered to her lord's pleasure.
She hid the torment in her heart, and seemed neither
troubled nor downcast. She compassed the bride with
every fair observance, and waited upon her right daintily.</p>

<a name="Footnote_1"/><a href="#FNanchor1">[1]</a><div class="note"> This is a play on words; Frêne in the French,
meaning ash, and Coudre meaning hazel.</div>

<p>Her courage was marvellous to that company of lords
and ladies, who observed her curiously. The mother
of the bride regarded her also, and praised her privily.
She said aloud that had she known the sweetness of
this lady, she would not have taken her lover from her,
nor spoiled her life for the sake of the bride. The night
being come the damsel entered in the bridal chamber
to deck the bed against her lord. She put off her mantle,
and calling the chamberlains, showed them how their
master loved to lie. His bed being softly arrayed, a
coverlet was spread upon the linen sheets. Frêne looked
upon the coverlet: in her eyes it showed too mean a
garnishing for so fair a lord. She turned it over in
her mind, and going to her coffret she took therefrom
that rich stuff of sanguine silk, and set it on the couch.
This she did not only in honour of her friend, but
that the Archbishop might not despise the house,
when he blessed the marriage bed, according to the rite.
When all was ready the mother carried the bride to
that chamber where she should lie, to disarray her
for the night. Looking upon the bed she marked the
silken coverlet, for she had never seen so rich a cloth,
save only that in which she wrapped her child. When
she remembered of this thing, her heart turned to water.
She summoned a chamberlain.</p>

<p>"Tell me," she said, "tell me in good faith where
this garniture was found."</p>

<p>"Lady," he made reply, "that you shall know. Our
damsel spread it on the bed, because this dossal is
richer than the coverlet that was there before."</p>

<p>The lady called for the damsel. Frêne came before
her in haste, being yet without her mantle. All the
mother moved within her, as she plied her with questions.</p>

<p>"Fair friend, hide it not a whit from me. Tell me
truly where this fair samite was found; whence came
it; who gave it to you? Answer swiftly, and tell me
who bestowed on you this cloth?"</p>

<p>The damsel made answer to her:</p>

<p>"Lady, my aunt, the Abbess, gave me this silken stuff,
and charged me to keep it carefully. At the same time
she gave me a ring, which those who put me forth,
had bound upon me."</p>

<p>"Fair friend, may I see this ring?"</p>

<p>"Certes, lady, I shall be pleased to show it."</p>

<p>The lady looked closely on the ring, when it was
brought. She knew again her own, and the crimson
samite flung upon the bed. No doubt was in her mind.
She knew and was persuaded that Frêne was her very
child. All words were spoken, and there was nothing
more to hide.</p>

<p>"Thou art my daughter, fair friend."</p>

<p>Then for reason of the pity that was hers, she fell to
the ground, and lay in a swoon. When the lady came
again to herself, she sent for her husband, who, all
adread, hastened to the chamber. He marvelled the
more sorely when his wife fell at his feet, and embracing
him closely, entreated pardon for the evil that she had
done.</p>

<p>Knowing nothing of her trespass, he made reply,
"Wife, what is this? Between you and me there is
nothing to call for forgiveness. Pardon you may have for
whatever fault you please. Tell me plainly what is
your wish."</p>

<p>"Husband, my offence is so black, that you had better
give me absolution before I tell you the sin. A long time
ago, by reason of lightness and malice, I spoke evil of my
neighbour, whenas she bore two sons at a birth. I fell
afterwards into the very pit that I had digged. Though
I told you that I was delivered of a daughter, the truth
is that I had borne two maids. One of these I wrapped
in our stuff of samite, together with the ring you gave
me the first time we met, and caused her to be laid beside
a church. Such a sin will out. The cloth and the ring I
have found, and I have recognised our maid, whom I had
lost by my own folly. She is this very damsel—so fair
and amiable to all—whom the knight so greatly loved.
Now we have married the lord to her sister."</p>

<p>The husband made answer,
"Wife, if your sin be double, our joy is manifold. Very
tenderly hath God dealt with us, in giving us back our
child. I am altogether joyous and content to have two
daughters for one. Daughter, come to your father's
side."</p>

<p>The damsel rejoiced greatly to hear this story. Her
father tarried no longer, but seeking his son-in-law,
brought him to the Archbishop, and related the adventure.
The knight knew such joy as was never yet. The
Archbishop gave counsel that on the morrow he would
part him and her whom he had joined together. This
was done, for in the morning he severed them, bed and
board. Afterwards he married Frêne to her friend, and
her father accorded the damsel with a right good heart.
Her mother and sister were with her at the wedding, and
for dowry her father gave her the half of his heritage.
When they returned to their own realm they took
Coudre, their daughter, with them. There she was
granted to a lord of those parts, and rich was the feast.</p>

<p>When this adventure was bruited abroad, and all
the story, the Lay of the Ash Tree was written, so called
of the lady, named Frêne.</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title">THE LAY OF THE HONEYSUCKLE</h2>

<p>With a glad heart and right good mind will I tell the
Lay that men call Honeysuckle; and that the truth may
be known of all it shall be told as many a minstrel has
sung it to my ear, and as the scribe hath written it
for our delight. It is of Tristan and Isoude, the Queen.
It is of a love which passed all other love, of love from
whence came wondrous sorrow, and whereof they died
together in the self-same day.</p>

<p>King Mark was sorely wrath with Tristan, his sister's
son, and bade him avoid his realm, by reason of the
love he bore the Queen. So Tristan repaired to his own
land, and dwelt for a full year in South Wales, where
he was born. Then since he might not come where
he would be, Tristan took no heed to his ways, but
let his life run waste to Death. Marvel not overmuch
thereat, for he who loves beyond measure must ever
be sick in heart and hope, when he may not win according
to his wish. So sick in heart and mind was Tristan that
he left his kingdom, and returned straight to the realm
of his banishment, because that in Cornwall dwelt the
Queen. There he hid privily in the deep forest, withdrawn
from the eyes of men; only when the evening
was come, and all things sought their rest, he prayed
the peasant and other mean folk of that country, of their
charity to grant him shelter for the night. From the
serf he gathered tidings of the King. These gave again
to him what they, in turn, had taken from some outlawed
knight. Thus Tristan learned that when Pentecost
was come King Mark purposed to hold high Court at
Tintagel, and keep the feast with pomp and revelry;
moreover that thither would ride Isoude, the Queen.</p>

<p>When Tristan heard this thing he rejoiced greatly,
since the Queen might not adventure through the forest,
except he saw her with his eyes. After the King had
gone his way, Tristan entered within the wood, and
sought the path by which the Queen must come. There
he cut a wand from out a certain hazel-tree, and having
trimmed and peeled it of its bark, with his dagger he
carved his name upon the wood. This he placed upon
her road, for well he knew that should the Queen but
mark his name she would bethink her of her friend.
Thus had it chanced before. For this was the sum of
the writing set upon the wand, for Queen Isoude's heart
alone: how that in this wild place Tristan had lurked
and waited long, so that he might look upon her face,
since without her he was already dead. Was it not with
them as with the Honeysuckle and the Hazel tree she
was passing by! So sweetly laced and taken were they
in one close embrace, that thus they might remain
whilst life endured. But should rough hands part so
fond a clasping, the hazel would wither at the root,
and the honeysuckle must fail. Fair friend, thus is
the case with us, nor you without me, nor I without you.</p>

<p>Now the Queen fared at adventure down the forest
path. She spied the hazel wand set upon her road, and
well she remembered the letters and the name. She bade
the knights of her company to draw rein, and dismount
from their palfreys, so that they might refresh themselves
a little. When her commandment was done she
withdrew from them a space, and called to her Brangwaine,
her maiden, and own familiar friend. Then she
hastened within the wood, to come on him whom more
she loved than any living soul. How great the joy
between these twain, that once more they might speak
together softly, face to face. Isoude showed him her
delight. She showed in what fashion she strove to bring
peace and concord betwixt Tristan and the King, and
how grievously his banishment had weighed upon her
heart. Thus sped the hour, till it was time for them to
part; but when these lovers freed them from the other's
arms, the tears were wet upon their cheeks. So Tristan
returned to Wales, his own realm, even as his uncle
bade. But for the joy that he had had of her, his friend,
for her sweet face, and for the tender words that she had
spoken, yea, and for that writing upon the wand, to
remember all these things, Tristan, that cunning harper,
wrought a new Lay, as shortly I have told you.
Goatleaf, men call this song in English. Chèvrefeuille
it is named in French; but Goatleaf or Honeysuckle,
here you have the very truth in the Lay that I have
spoken.</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title">THE LAY OF EQUITAN</h2>

<p>In ancient days many a noble lord lived in Brittany
beyond the Seas. By reason of their courtesy and nobleness
they would gladly keep in remembrance the deeds
that were done in the land. That these marvellous
things should not be forgotten they fashioned them into
Lays. Amongst these Lays I have heard tell of one
which is not made to die as though it had never been.</p>

<p>Equitan, lord of Nantes, was a loyal and courteous
gentleman, of great worth, beloved by all in his own
country. He was set on pleasure, and was Love's lover,
as became a gentle knight. Like many others who dote
on woman, he observed neither sense nor measure in
love. But it is in the very nature of Love that proportion
cannot enter into the matter.</p>

<p>Equitan had for seneschal a right brave and loyal
knight, who was captain of his army, and did justice
in his realm. He was often abroad upon his master's
business, for the King would not forego his delight for
any reason whatever. To dance, to hunt, to fish within
the river—this was all his joy. This seneschal was married
to a wife, by whom great evil came upon the land.
Very desirable was the lady; passing tender of body,
and sweet of vesture, coiffed and fretted with gold. Her
eyes were blue; her face warmly coloured, with a
fragrant mouth, and a dainty nose. Certainly she had
no peer in all the realm. The King had heard much
in praise of this lady and many a time saluted her upon
the way. He had also sent her divers gifts. Often he
considered in his mind how best he might get speech
with the dame. For his privy pleasure this amorous
King went to chase in that country where the seneschal
had his castle. The lady being in her own house,
Equitan craved a lodging for the night. By this means
when the hunt was done, he could speak with her, and
show what was in his heart. Equitan found the lady
as discreet as courteous. He looked closely upon her,
for she was fair of face and person, and sweet of semblance
and address. Love bound him captive to his
car. The god loosed a shaft which entered deeply in his
breast. The arrow pierced to his heart, and from thenceforth
he cared nothing for measure, or kingship, or
delight. Equitan was so surprised of the lady, that he
remained silent and pensive. He heard nothing, and
nothing he could do. All night he lay in unrest upon
the bed, reproaching himself for what had come to pass.</p>

<p>"Alas," said he, "what evil fate has led me into
this land! The sight only of this lady has put such
anguish into my heart that my members fail beneath
me. It is Love, I deem, who rides me thus cruelly.
But if I love this lady I shall do a great wrong. She
is the wife of my seneschal, and it is my duty to keep
the same love and faith to him as I would wish him
to observe with me. If by any means I could know
what is in her mind, I should be the easier, for torment
is doubled that you bear alone. There is not a dame,
however curst, but would rather love than not; for if
she were a contemner of love where would be her courtesy?
But if she loves, there is not a woman under the
sky who would not suck thereout all the advantage
that she may. If the matter came to the ears of the
seneschal, he ought not to think too hardly of me. He
cannot hope to keep such treasure for himself alone;
and, certes, I shall claim my portion."</p>

<p>Equitan tossed on his bed, and sighed. His thoughts
were still on the lady, so that in a little he said,
"I think of the ford, before I come to the river. I
go too quickly, for I know not yet whether the lady will
take me as her friend. But know I will as swiftly as I
can, since I cannot get rest or sleep. I will come before
her as soon as it is day, and if she feels as I feel, the
sooner I shall be rid of my pain."</p>

<p>The King kept vigil till the daylight came at last.
He arose and went forth, as if to the chase. He returned
presently, telling that he was sick, and going straight
to his chamber, lay upon his bed. The seneschal was
very troubled, for he could not imagine the sickness
of which his master felt the pangs. He counselled his
wife to seek their guest, that she might cheer and comfort
him in his trouble. When they were alone the King
opened to her his heart. He told her that he was dying
for her love, and that if she had no more than friendship
to offer, he preferred death before life.</p>

<p>"Sire," replied the dame, "I require a little time to
think of what you say, for I cannot answer yes or no,
without thought, in a business of this moment. I am
not of your wealth, and you are too high a lord, for your
love to do more than rest lightly on me. When you
have had your desire, it will as lightly fly away. My
sorrow would be overlong, if I should love you, and
grant you what you wish. It is much the best that
between you and me love should not be spoken of.
You are a puissant prince; my husband is one of your
vassals, and faith and trust should bind us—not the
dangerous bond of love. Love is only lasting between
like and like. Better is the love of an honest man—so
he be of sense and worth—than that of a prince or
king, with no loyalty in him. She who sets her love more
highly than she can reach, may pluck no fruit from the
tree. The rich man deems that love is his of right.
He prays little of his friend, for he thinks none dare
take her from his hand, and that her tenderness is his
by prize of lordship."</p>

<p>When she had ceased, Equitan made answer,
"Lady, I can offer you but short thanks for your
words, since they savour of scant courtesy. You speak
of love as a burgess makes a bargain. Those who desire
to get, rather than to give, often find that they have the
worser half of the business. There is no lady under
heaven—so she be courteous and kind and of a good
heart—but would grant her grace to a true lover, even
though she have beneath her cloak only a rich prince
in his castle. Those who care but for a fresh face—tricksters
in love as a cozener with dice—are justly
flouted and deceived, as oftentimes we see. None wastes
pity on him who receives the stripes he deserves. Dear
lady, let me make myself plain. Do not regard me as
your King; look on me as your servant and your friend.
I give my word and plight my troth that all my happiness
shall be found in your pleasure. Let me not die
for your love. You shall be the Dame, and I the page;
you shall be the scornful beauty, and I the prayer at
your knee."</p>

<p>The King prayed the lady so urgently, so tenderly
he sued for grace, that at the last she assured him of
her love, and gave him the gift of her heart. They
granted rings one to another, and pledged affiance
between them. They kept this faith, and guarded this
love, till they died together, and there was an end to all.</p>

<p>Equitan and the lady loved for a great while without
it coming to the ears of any. When the King desired
to have speech of his friend, he told his household that
he would be alone, since it was the day appointed for
his bleeding. The King having shut the doors of his
chamber, there was none so bold as to enter therein,
save he were bidden of his lord. Whilst he was busied
in this fashion, the seneschal sat in open court to hear
the pleas and right the wrong. He was as much to the
King's mind, as his wife was to the King's heart. The
lord was so assotted upon the lady that he would neither
take to himself a wife, nor listen to a word upon the
matter. His people blamed him loudly, so loudly that
it came to the ears of the lady. She was passing heavy,
for she feared greatly that the barons would have their
way. When next she had speech with Equitan, in place
of the kiss and sweetness of her customary greeting,
she came before him making great sorrow and in tears.
The King inquiring the reason of her dolour, the lady
replied,
"Sire, I lament our love, and the trouble I always
said would be mine. You are about to wed the daughter
of some King, and my good days are over. Everybody
says so, and I know it to be true. What will become of
me when you put me away! I will die, rather than lose
you, for I may have no other comfort."</p>

<p>The King made answer very tenderly,
"Fair friend, you need not fear. There will never be
wife of mine to put you from me. I shall never wed,
except your husband die, and then it is you who would
be my queen and lady. I will leave you for no other
dame."</p>

<p>The lady thanked him sweetly for his words. Much
was she beholden to him in her heart. Since she was
assured that he would not leave her for any other,
she turned over swiftly in her mind the profit that would
come from her husband's death. Much happiness might
be bought at a little cost, if Equitan would lend his aid.</p>

<p>The King made answer that he would do her will to
the utmost of his power, whether her counsel were for
good or evil.</p>

<p>"Sire," said the lady, "let it please you to hunt
the forest within the country where I dwell. You
can lodge in my lord's castle, and there you must be
bled. Three days after your surgery is done, you must
call for your bath. My lord shall be bled with you, so
that he may go to his bathing at the same time. It
will be your part to keep him at your side, and make
him your constant companion. It will be mine to
heat the water, and to carry the baths to your chamber.
My husband's bath shall boil so fiercely, that no breathing
man, having entered therein, may come forth living.
When he is dead you must call for your people, and
show them how the seneschal has died suddenly in his
bath."</p>

<p>Because of his love the King granted her desire, and
promised to do according to her will. Before three
months were done the King rode to the chase within the
lady's realm. He caused surgeons to bleed him for his
health, and the seneschal with him. He said that he
would take his bath on the third day, and the seneschal
required his, too, to be made ready. The lady caused
the water to be heated, and carried the baths to the
chamber. According to her device she set a bath
beside each bed, filling with boiling water that bath
which her lord should enter. Her lord had gone forth
for a little, so for a space the King and the lady were
alone. They sat on the husband's bed, and looked
tenderly each on the other, near by that heated bath.
The door of the chamber was kept by a young damsel
to give them warning. The seneschal made haste to
return, and would have struck on the door of the
chamber, but was stayed by the maiden. He put her
by, and in his impatience flung the door wide open.
Entering he found his master and his wife clasped in
each other's arms. When the King saw the seneschal
he had no thought but to hide his dishonour. He
started up, and sprang with joined feet in the bath
that was filled with boiling water. There he perished
miserably, in the very snare he had spread for another,
who was safe and sound. The seneschal marked what
had happened to the King. In his rage he turned to
his wife, and laying hands upon her thrust her, head
first, in the self-same bath. So they died together, the
King first, and the lady afterwards, with him.</p>

<p>Those who are willing to listen to fair words, may
learn from this ensample, that he who seeks another's
ill often brings the evil upon himself.</p>

<p>As I have told you before, of this adventure the
Bretons made the Lay of Equitan, the lady whom he
loved, and of their end.</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title">THE LAY OF MILON</h2>

<p>He who would tell divers tales must know how to vary
the tune. To win the favour of any, he must speak to
the understanding of all. I purpose in this place to
show you the story of Milon, and—since few words are
best—I will set out the adventure as briefly as I may.</p>

<p>Milon was born in South Wales. So great was his
prowess that from the day he was dubbed knight there
was no champion who could stand before him in the lists.
He was a passing fair knight, open and brave, courteous
to his friends, and stern to his foes. Men praised his
name in whatever realm they talked of gallant deeds—Ireland,
Norway, and Wales, yea, from Jutland even
to Albania. Since he was praised by the frank, he was
therefore envied of the mean. Nevertheless, by reason of
his skill with the spear, he was counted a very worshipful
knight, and was honourably entreated by many a prince
in divers lands.</p>

<p>In Milon's own realm there lived a lord whose name
has gone from mind. With this baron dwelt his daughter,
a passing fair and gracious damsel. Much talk had this
maiden heard of Milon's knightly deeds, so that she
began to set her thoughts upon him, because of the good
men spoke of him. She sent him a message by a sure
hand, saying that if her love was to his mind, sweetly
would it be to her heart. Milon rejoiced greatly when
he knew this thing. He thanked the lady for her words,
giving her love again in return for her own, and swearing
that he would never depart therefrom any day of his days.
Beyond this courteous answer Milon bestowed on the messenger
costly gifts, and made him promises that were
richer still.</p>

<p>"Friend," said he, "of your charity I pray you that I
may have speech with my friend, in such a fashion
that none shall know of our meeting. Carry her this, my
golden ring. Tell her, on my part, that so she pleases she
shall come to me, or, if it be her better pleasure, I will go
to her."</p>

<p>The messenger bade farewell, and returned to his lady.
He placed the ring in her hand, saying that he had
done her will, as he was bidden to do.</p>

<p>Right joyous was the damsel to know that Milon's love
was tender as her own. She required her friend to come
for speech within the private garden of her house, where
she was wont to take her delight. Milon came at her
commandment. He came so often, and so dearly she
loved him, that in the end she gave him all that maid may
give. When the damsel perceived how it was with her,
she sent messages to her friend, telling him of her case,
and making great sorrow.</p>

<p>"I have lost my father and all his wealth," said the
lady, "for when he hears of this matter he will make
of me an example. Either I shall be tormented with
the sword, or else he will sell me as a slave in a far
country."</p>

<p>(For such was the usage of our fathers in the days
of this tale).</p>

<p>Milon grieved sorely, and made answer that he would
do the thing the damsel thought most seemly to be done.</p>

<p>"When the child is born," replied the lady, "you must carry him
forthwith to my sister. She is a rich dame, pitiful and good, and is
wedded to a lord of Northumberland. You will send messages with the
babe—both in writing and by speech—that the little innocent is her
sister's child. Whether it be a boy or girl his mother will have
suffered much because of him, and for her sister's sake you will pray
her to cherish the babe. Beyond this I shall set your signet by a lace
about his neck, and write letters wherein shall be made plain the name
of his sire, and the sad story of his mother. When he shall have grown
tall, and of an age to understand these matters, his aunt will give him
your ring, and rehearse to him the letter. If this be done, perchance
the orphan will not be fatherless all his days."</p>

<p>Milon approved the counsel of the lady, and when her
time had come she was brought to bed of a boy. The old
nurse who tended her mistress was privy to the damsel's
inmost mind. So warily she went to work, so cunning was
she in gloss and concealment, that none within the palace
knew that there was aught to hide. The damsel looked
upon her boy, and saw that he was very fair. She laced
the ring about his neck, and set the letter that it were
death to find, within a silken chatelaine. The child
was then placed in his cradle, swathed close in white
linen. A pillow of feathers was put beneath his head,
and over all was laid a warm coverlet, wadded with
fur. In this fashion the ancient nurse gave the babe to
his father, who awaited him within the garden. Milon
commended the child to his men, charging them to carry
him loyally, by such towns as they knew, to that lady
beyond the Humber. The servitors set forth, bearing the
infant with them. Seven times a day they reposed them
in their journey, so that the women might nourish the
babe, and bathe and tend him duly. They served their
lord so faithfully, keeping such watch upon the way,
that at the last they won to the lady to whom they
were bidden. The lady received them courteously, as
became her breeding. She broke the seal of the letter, and
when she was assured of what was therein, marvellously
she cherished the infant. These having bestowed the boy
in accordance with their lord's commandment, returned
to their own land.</p>

<p>Milon went forth from his realm to serve beyond the
seas for guerdon. His friend remained within her house
and was granted by her father in marriage to a right rich
baron of that country. Though this baron was a worthy
knight, justly esteemed of all his fellows, the damsel was
grieved beyond measure when she knew her father's will.
She called to mind the past, and regretted that Milon had
gone from the country, since he would have helped her
in her need.</p>

<p>"Alas!" said the lady, "what shall I do? I doubt
that I am lost, for my lord will find that his bride is
not a maid. If this becomes known they will make
me a bondwoman for all my days. Would that my
friend were here to free me from this coil. It were good
for me to die rather than to live, but by no means can I
escape from their hands. They have set warders about
me, men, old and young, whom they call my chamberlains,
contemners of love, who delight themselves in
sadness. But endure it I must, for, alas, I know not
how to die."</p>

<p>So on the appointed day the lady was wedded to the
baron, and her husband took her to dwell with him
in his fief.</p>

<p>When Milon returned to his own country he was right
heavy and sorrowful to learn of this marriage. He
lamented his wretched case, but in this he found comfort,
that he was not far from the realm where the lady abode
whom so tenderly he loved. Milon commenced to think
within himself how best he might send letters to the
damsel that he was come again to his home, yet so that
none should have knowledge thereof. He wrote a
letter, and sealed it with his seal. This message he
made fast to the neck, and hid within the plumage of
a swan that was long his, and was greatly to his
heart. He bade his squire to come, and made him
his messenger.</p>

<p>"Change thy raiment swiftly," said he, "and hasten to
the castle of my friend. Take with thee my swan, and see
that none, neither servant nor handmaid, delivers the
bird to my lady, save thyself alone."</p>

<p>The squire did according to his lord's commandment.
He made him ready quickly, and went forth, bearing
the swan with him. He went by the nearest road, and
passing through the streets of the city, came before the
portal of the castle. In answer to his summons the porter
drew near.</p>

<p>"Friend," said he, "hearken to me. I am of Caerleon,
and a fowler by craft. Within my nets I have snared the
most marvellous swan in the world. This wondrous bird
I would bestow forthwith upon your lady, but perforce I
must offer her the gift with my own hand."</p>

<p>"Friend," replied the porter, "fowlers are not always
welcomed of ladies. If you come with me I will bring
you where I may know whether it pleases my lady to have
speech with you and to receive your gift."</p>

<p>The porter entered in the hall, where he found none but
two lords seated at a great table, playing chess for their
delight. He swiftly returned on his steps, and the fowler
with him, so furtively withal that the lords were not
disturbed at their game, nor perceived aught of the matter.
They went therefore to the chamber of the lady. In
answer to their call the door was opened to them by a
maiden, who led them before her dame. When the swan
was proffered to the lady it pleased her to receive the gift.
She summoned a varlet of her household and gave the
bird to his charge, commanding him to keep it safely,
and to see that it ate enough and to spare.</p>

<p>"Lady," said the servitor, "I will do your bidding.
We shall never receive from any fowler on earth such
another bird as this. The swan is fit to serve at a royal
table, for the bird is plump as he is fair."</p>

<p>The varlet put the swan in his lady's hands. She took
the bird kindly, and smoothing his head and neck,
felt the letter that was hidden beneath its feathers. The
blood pricked in her veins, for well she knew that the
writing was sent her by her friend. She caused the fowler
to be given of her bounty, and bade the men to go forth
from her chamber. When they had parted the lady
called a maiden to her aid. She broke the seal, and
unfastening the letter, came upon the name of Milon at
the head. She kissed the name a hundred times through
her tears. When she might read the writing she learned
of the great pain and dolour that her lover suffered by
day and by night. In you—he wrote—is all my pleasure,
and in your white hands it lies to heal me or to slay.
Strive to find a plan by which we may speak as friend
to friend, if you would have me live. The knight
prayed her in his letter to send him an answer by means
of the swan. If the bird were well guarded, and kept
without provand for three days, he would of a surety
fly back to the place from whence he came, with any
message that the lady might lace about his neck.</p>

<p>When the damsel had considered the writing, and
understood what was put therein, she commanded that her
bird should be tended carefully, and given plenteously to
eat and to drink. She held him for a month within her
chamber, but this was less from choice, than for the
craft that was necessary to obtain the ink and parchment
requisite for her writing. At the end she wrote a letter
according to her heart, and sealed it with her ring. The
lady caused the swan to fast for three full days; then
having concealed the message about his neck, let him
take his flight. The bird was all anhungered for food,
and remembering well the home from which he drew, he
returned thither as quickly as his wings might bear him.</p>

<p>He knew again his town, and his master's house, and
descended to the ground at Milon's very feet. Milon
rejoiced greatly when he marked his own. He caught
the bird by his wings, and crying for his steward, bade
him give the swan to eat. The knight removed the
missive from the messenger's neck. He glanced from head
to head of the letter, seeking the means that he hoped to
find, and the salutation he so tenderly wished. Sweet
to his heart was the writing, for the lady wrote that without
him there was no joy in her life, and since it was his
desire to hear by the swan, it would be her pleasure also.</p>

<p>For twenty years the swan was made the messenger of
these two lovers, who might never win together. There
was no speech between them, save that carried by the
bird. They caused the swan to fast for three days,
and then sent him on his errand. He to whom the letter
came, saw to it that the messenger was fed to heart's
desire. Many a time the swan went upon his journey,
for however strictly the lady was held of her husband,
there was none who had suspicion of a bird.</p>

<p>The dame beyond the Humber nourished and tended
the boy committed to her charge with the greatest care.
When he was come to a fitting age she made him to
be knighted of her lord, for goodly and serviceable was
the lad. On the same day the aunt read over to him
the letter, and put in his hand the ring. She told him
the name of his mother, and his father's story. In all
the world there was no worthier knight, nor a more
chivalrous and gallant gentleman. The lad hearkened
diligently to the lady's tale. He rejoiced greatly to hear
of his father's prowess, and was proud beyond measure of
his renown. He considered within himself, saying to his
own heart, that much should be required of his father's
son, and that he would not be worthy of his blood if he
did not endeavour to merit his name. He determined
therefore that he would leave his country, and seek
adventure as a knight errant, beyond the sea. The
varlet delayed no longer than the evening. On the morrow
he bade farewell to his aunt, who having warned and
admonished him for his good, gave him largely of her
wealth, to bring him on his way. He rode to Southampton,
that he might find a ship equipped for sea,
and so came to Barfleur. Without any tarrying the lad
went straight to Brittany, where he spent his money and
himself in feasts and in tourneys. The rich men of the
land were glad of his friendship, for there was none who
bore himself better in the press with spear or with sword.
What he took from the rich he bestowed on such knights
as were poor and luckless. These loved him greatly,
since he gained largely and spent freely, granting of his
wealth to all. Wherever this knight sojourned in the
realm he bore away the prize. So debonair was he and
chivalrous that his fame and praise crossed the water,
and were noised abroad in his own land. Folk told how a
certain knight from beyond the Humber, who had passed
the sea in quest of wealth and honour, had so done, that
by reason of his prowess, his liberality, and his modesty,
men called him the Knight Peerless, since they did not
know his name.</p>

<p>This praise of the good knight, and of his deeds, came
to be heard of Milon. Very dolent was he and sorely
troubled that so young a knight should be esteemed above
his fathers. He marvelled greatly that the stout spears
of the past had not put on their harness and broken a
lance for their ancient honour. One thing he determined,
that he would cross the sea without delay, so that he
might joust with the dansellon, and abate his pride. In
wrath and anger he purposed to fight, to beat his adversary
from the saddle, and bring him at last to shame.
After this was ended he would seek his son, of whom he
had heard nothing, since he had gone from his aunt's
castle. Milon caused his friend to know of his wishes.
He opened out to her all his thought, and craved her
permission to depart. This letter he sent by the swan,
commending the bird to her care.</p>

<p>When the lady heard of her lover's purpose, she thanked
him for his courtesy, for greatly was his counsel to her
mind. She approved his desire to quit the realm for
the sake of his honour, and far from putting let and
hindrance in his path, trusted that in the end he would
bring again her son. Since Milon was assured of his
friend's goodwill, he arrayed himself richly, and crossing
the sea to Normandy, came afterwards into the land of
the Bretons. There he sought the friendship of the lords
of that realm, and fared to all the tournaments of which
he might hear. Milon bore himself proudly, and gave
graciously of his wealth, as though he were receiving a
gift. He sojourned till the winter was past in that land,
he, and a brave company of knights whom he held in his
house with him. When Easter had come, and the season
that men give to tourneys and wars and the righting of
their private wrongs, Milon considered how he could meet
with the knight whom men called Peerless. At that
time a tournament was proclaimed to be held at Mont
St. Michel. Many a Norman and Breton rode to the
game; knights of Flanders and of France were there in
plenty, but few fared from England. Milon drew to the
lists amongst the first. He inquired diligently of the
young champion, and all men were ready to tell from
whence he came, and of his harness, and of the blazon on
his shield. At length the knight appeared in the lists and
Milon looked upon the adversary he so greatly desired
to see. Now in this tournament a knight could joust
with that lord who was set over against him, or he could
seek to break a lance with his chosen foe. A player must
gain or lose, and he might find himself opposed either
by his comrade or his enemy. Milon did well and worshipfully
in the press, and was praised of many that
day. But the Knight Peerless carried the cry from all
his fellows, for none might stand before him, nor rival
him in skill and address. Milon observed him curiously.
The lad struck so heavily, he thrust home so shrewdly, that
Milon's hatred changed to envy as he watched. Very
comely showed the varlet, and much to Milon's mind.
The older knight set himself over against the champion,
and they met together in the centre of the field. Milon
struck his adversary so fiercely, that the lance splintered
in his gauntlet; but the young knight kept his seat
without even losing a stirrup. In return his spear was
aimed with such cunning that he bore his antagonist
to the ground. Milon lay upon the earth bareheaded,
for his helmet was unlaced in the shock. His hair and
beard showed white to all, and the varlet was heavy to
look on him whom he had overthrown. He caught
the destrier by the bridle, and led him before the stricken
man.</p>

<p>"Sir," said he, "I pray you to get upon your horse.
I am right grieved and vexed that I should have done
this wrong. Believe me that it was wrought unwittingly."</p>

<p>Milon sprang upon his steed. He approved the
courtesy of his adversary, and looking upon the hand
that held his bridle, he knew again his ring. He made
inquiry of the lad.</p>

<p>"Friend," said he, "hearken to me. Tell me now
the name of thy sire. How art thou called; who is
thy mother? I have seen much, and gone to and fro
about the world. All my life I have journeyed from realm
to realm, by reason of tourneys and quarrels and princes'
wars, yet never once by any knight have I been borne
from my horse. This day I am overthrown by a boy,
and yet I cannot help but love thee."</p>

<p>The varlet answered,
"I know little of my father. I understand that his
name is Milon, and that he was a knight of Wales.
He loved the daughter of a rich man, and was loved
again. My mother bore me in secret, and caused me
to be carried to Northumberland, where I was taught and
tended. An old aunt was at the costs of my nourishing.
She kept me at her side, till of all her gifts she gave me
horse and arms, and sent me here, where I have remained.
In hope and wish I purpose to cross the sea, and return
to my own realm. There I would seek out my father,
and learn how it stands between him and my mother.
I will show him my golden ring, and I will tell him
of such privy matters that he may not deny our
kinship, but must love me as a son, and ever hold me
dear."</p>

<p>When Milon heard these words he could endure
them no further. He got him swiftly from his horse,
and taking the lad by the fringe of his hauberk, he
cried,
"Praise be to God, for now am I healed. Fair friend,
by my faith thou art my very son, for whom I came
forth from my own land, and have sought through all
this realm."</p>

<p>The varlet climbed from the saddle, and stood upon
his feet. Father and son kissed each other tenderly,
with many comfortable words. Their love was fair to
see, and those who looked upon their meeting, wept
for joy and pity.</p>
<br/>

<p>Milon and his son departed from the tournament so
soon as it came to an end, for the knight desired greatly
to speak to the varlet at leisure, and to open before him
all his mind. They rode to their hostel, and with the
knights of their fellowship, passed the hours in mirth
and revelry. Milon spoke to the lad of his mother. He
told him of their long love, and how she was given by
her father in marriage to a baron of his realm. He
rehearsed the years of separation, accepted by both
with a good heart, and of the messenger who carried
letters between them, when there was none they dared
to trust in, save only the swan.</p>

<p>The son made answer,</p>

<p>"In faith, fair father, let us return to our own land.
There I will slay this husband, and you shall yet be
my mother's lord."</p>

<p>This being accorded between them, on the morrow they
made them ready for the journey, and bidding farewell to
their friends, set forth for Wales. They embarked in a
propitious hour, for a fair wind carried the ship right
swiftly to its haven. They had not ridden far upon
their road, when they met a certain squire of the lady's
household on his way to Brittany, bearing letters to
Milon. His task was done long before sundown in
chancing on the knight. He gave over the sealed
writing with which he was charged, praying the knight to
hasten to his friend without any tarrying, since her
husband was in his grave. Milon rejoiced greatly when
he knew this thing. He showed the message to his son,
and pressed forward without pause or rest. They made
such speed, that at the end they came to the castle where
the lady had her lodging. Light of heart was she
when she clasped again her child. These two fond
lovers sought neither countenance of their kin, nor counsel
of any man. Their son handselled them together, and
gave the mother to his sire. From the day they were wed
they dwelt in wealth and in sweetness to the end of
their lives.</p>

<p>Of their love and content the minstrel wrought this
Lay. I, also, who have set it down in writing, have won
guerdon enough just by telling over the tale.</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title">THE LAY OF YONEC</h2>

<p>Since I have commenced I would not leave any of these
Lays untold. The stories that I know I would tell
you forthwith. My hope is now to rehearse to you the
story of Yonec, the son of Eudemarec, his mother's
first born child.</p>

<p>In days of yore there lived in Britain a rich man, old
and full of years, who was lord of the town and realm of
Chepstow. This town is builded on the banks of the
Douglas, and is renowned by reason of many ancient
sorrows which have there befallen. When he was well
stricken in years this lord took to himself a wife, that he
might have children to come after him in his goodly
heritage. The damsel, who was bestowed on this
wealthy lord, came of an honourable house, and was
kind and courteous, and passing fair. She was beloved
by all because of her beauty, and none was more sweetly
spoken of from Chepstow to Lincoln, yea, or from there
to Ireland. Great was their sin who married the maiden
to this aged man. Since she was young and gay, he
shut her fast within his tower, that he might the easier
keep her to himself. He set in charge of the damsel
his elder sister, a widow, to hold her more surely in
ward. These two ladies dwelt alone in the tower, together
with their women, in a chamber by themselves. There
the damsel might have speech of none, except at the
bidding of the ancient dame. More than seven years
passed in this fashion. The lady had no children for
her solace, and she never went forth from the castle
to greet her kinsfolk and her friends. Her husband's
jealousy was such that when she sought her bed, no
chamberlain or usher was permitted in her chamber
to light the candles. The lady became passing heavy.
She spent her days in sighs and tears. Her loveliness
began to fail, for she gave no thought to her person.
Indeed at times she hated the very shadow of that beauty
which had spoiled all her life.</p>

<p>Now when April had come with the gladness of the
birds, this lord rose early on a day to take his pleasure
in the woods. He bade his sister to rise from her bed
to make the doors fast behind him. She did his will,
and going apart, commenced to read the psalter that
she carried in her hand. The lady awoke, and shamed
the brightness of the sun with her tears. She saw that
the old woman was gone forth from the chamber, so
she made her complaint without fear of being overheard.</p>

<p>"Alas," said she, "in an ill hour was I born. My
lot is hard to be shut in this tower, never to go out till
I am carried to my grave. Of whom is this jealous
lord fearful that he holds me so fast in prison? Great
is a man's folly always to have it in mind that he may
be deceived. I cannot go to church, nor hearken to the
service of God. If I might talk to folk, or have a little
pleasure in my life, I should show the more tenderness
to my husband, as is my wish. Very greatly are my
parents and my kin to blame for giving me to this
jealous old man, and making us one flesh. I cannot even
look to become a widow, for he will never die. In place
of the waters of baptism, certainly he was plunged in
the flood of the Styx. His nerves are like iron, and his
veins quick with blood as those of a young man. Often
have I heard that in years gone by things chanced to the
sad, which brought their sorrows to an end. A knight
would meet with a maiden, fresh and fair to his desire.
Damsels took to themselves lovers, discreet and brave,
and were blamed of none. Moreover since these ladies
were not seen of any, except their friends, who was
there to count them blameworthy! Perchance I deceive
myself, and in spite of all the tales, such adventures
happened to none. Ah, if only the mighty God would
but shape the world to my wish!"</p>

<p>When the lady had made her plaint, as you have
known, the shadow of a great bird darkened the narrow
window, so that she marvelled what it might mean.
This falcon flew straightway into the chamber, jessed
and hooded from the glove, and came where the dame
was seated. Whilst the lady yet wondered upon him,
the tercel became a young and comely knight before her
eyes. The lady marvelled exceedingly at this sorcery.
Her blood turned to water within her, and because of
her dread she hid her face in her hands. By reason of
his courtesy the knight first sought to persuade her to
put away her fears.</p>

<p>"Lady," said he, "be not so fearful. To you this
hawk shall be as gentle as a dove. If you will listen to
my words I will strive to make plain what may now be
dark. I have come in this shape to your tower that I
may pray you of your tenderness to make of me your
friend. I have loved you for long, and in my heart
have esteemed your love above anything in the world.
Save for you I have never desired wife or maid, and I
shall find no other woman desirable, until I die. I should
have sought you before, but I might not come, nor even
leave my own realm, till you called me in your need.
Lady, in charity, take me as your friend."</p>

<p>The lady took heart and courage whilst she hearkened
to these words. Presently she uncovered her face, and
made answer. She said that perchance she would be
willing to give him again his hope, if only she had assurance
of his faith in God. This she said because of her
fear, but in her heart she loved him already by reason
of his great beauty. Never in her life had she beheld
so goodly a youth, nor a knight more fair.</p>

<p>"Lady," he replied, "you ask rightly. For nothing
that man can give would I have you doubt my faith and
affiance. I believe truly in God, the Maker of all, who
redeemed us from the woe brought on us by our father
Adam, in the eating of that bitter fruit. This God is
and was and ever shall be the life and light of us poor
sinful men. If you still give no credence to my word,
ask for your chaplain; tell him that since you are sick
you greatly desire to hear the Service appointed by
God to heal the sinner of his wound. I will take your
semblance, and receive the Body of the Lord. You will
thus be certified of my faith, and never have reason
to mistrust me more."</p>

<p>When the sister of that ancient lord returned from
her prayers to the chamber, she found that the lady
was awake. She told her that since it was time to get
her from bed, she would make ready her vesture. The
lady made answer that she was sick, and begged her
to warn the chaplain, for greatly she feared that she
might die. The agèd dame replied,</p>

<p>"You must endure as best you may, for my lord
has gone to the woods, and none will enter in the tower,
save me."</p>

<p>Right distressed was the lady to hear these words.
She called a woman's wiles to her aid, and made seeming
to swoon upon her bed. This was seen by the sister of
her lord, and much was she dismayed. She set wide
the doors of the chamber, and summoned the priest.
The chaplain came as quickly as he was able, carrying
with him the Lord's Body. The knight received the
Gift, and drank of the Wine of that chalice; then the
priest went his way, and the old woman made fast the
door behind him.</p>

<p>The knight and the lady were greatly at their ease;
a comelier and a blither pair were never seen. They
had much to tell one to the other, but the hours passed
till it was time for the knight to go again to his own
realm. He prayed the dame to give him leave to depart,
and she sweetly granted his prayer, yet so only that he
promised to return often to her side.</p>

<p>"Lady," he made answer, "so you please to require
me at any hour, you may be sure that I shall hasten at
your pleasure. But I beg you to observe such
measure in the matter, that none may do us wrong.
This old woman will spy upon us night and day, and if
she observes our friendship, will certainly show it to
her lord. Should this evil come upon us, for both it
means separation, and for me, most surely, death."</p>

<p>The knight returned to his realm, leaving behind
him the happiest lady in the land. On the morrow
she rose sound and well, and went lightly through the
week. She took such heed to her person, that her former
beauty came to her again. The tower that she was wont
to hate as her prison, became to her now as a pleasant
lodging, that she would not leave for any abode and
garden on earth. There she could see her friend at will,
when once her lord had gone forth from the chamber.
Early and late, at morn and eve, the lovers met together.
God grant her joy was long, against the evil day that
came.</p>

<p>The husband of the lady presently took notice of
the change in his wife's fashion and person. He was
troubled in his soul, and misdoubting his sister, took
her apart to reason with her on a day. He told her of
his wonder that his dame arrayed her so sweetly, and
inquired what this should mean. The crone answered
that she knew no more than he, "for we have very little
speech one with another. She sees neither kin nor friend;
but, now, she seems quite content to remain alone in
her chamber."</p>

<p>The husband made reply,</p>

<p>"Doubtless she is content, and well content. But
by my faith, we must do all we may to discover the
cause. Hearken to me. Some morning when I have
risen from bed, and you have shut the doors upon me,
make pretence to go forth, and let her think herself
alone. You must hide yourself in a privy place, where
you can both hear and see. We shall then learn the
secret of this new found joy."</p>

<p>Having devised this snare the twain went their ways.
Alas, for those who were innocent of their counsel, and
whose feet would soon be tangled in the net.</p>

<p>Three days after, this husband pretended to go forth
from his house. He told his wife that the King had
bidden him by letters to his Court, but that he should
return speedily. He went from the chamber, making
fast the door. His sister arose from her bed, and hid
behind her curtains, where she might see and hear
what so greedily she desired to know. The lady could
not sleep, so fervently she wished for her friend. The
knight came at her call, but he might not tarry, nor
cherish her more than one single hour. Great was the
joy between them, both in word and tenderness, till
he could no longer stay. All this the crone saw with
her eyes, and stored in her heart. She watched the
fashion in which he came, and the guise in which he
went. But she was altogether fearful and amazed that
so goodly a knight should wear the semblance of a hawk.
When the husband returned to his house—for he was
near at hand—his sister told him that of which she was
the witness, and of the truth concerning the knight.
Right heavy was he and wrathful. Straightway he
contrived a cunning gin for the slaying of this bird. He
caused four blades of steel to be fashioned, with point
and edge sharper than the keenest razor. These he
fastened firmly together, and set them securely within
that window, by which the tercel would come to his
lady. Ah, God, that a knight so fair might not see nor
hear of this wrong, and that there should be none to
show him of such treason.</p>

<p>On the morrow the husband arose very early, at daybreak,
saying that he should hunt within the wood.
His sister made the doors fast behind him, and returned
to her bed to sleep, because it was yet but dawn. The
lady lay awake, considering of the knight whom she
loved so loyally. Tenderly she called him to her side.
Without any long tarrying the bird came flying at her
will. He flew in at the open window, and was entangled
amongst the blades of steel. One blade pierced his
body so deeply, that the red blood gushed from the
wound. When the falcon knew that his hurt was to
death, he forced himself to pass the barrier, and coming
before his lady fell upon her bed, so that the sheets
were dabbled with his blood. The lady looked upon
her friend and his wound, and was altogether anguished
and distraught.</p>

<p>"Sweet friend," said the knight, "it is for you that
my life is lost. Did I not speak truly that if our loves
were known, very surely I should be slain?"</p>

<p>On hearing these words the lady's head fell upon the
pillow, and for a space she lay as she were dead. The
knight cherished her sweetly. He prayed her not to
sorrow overmuch, since she should bear a son who would
be her exceeding comfort. His name should be called
Yonec. He would prove a valiant knight, and would
avenge both her and him by slaying their enemy. The
knight could stay no longer, for he was bleeding to death
from his hurt. In great dolour of mind and body he
flew from the chamber. The lady pursued the bird
with many shrill cries. In her desire to follow him she
sprang forth from the window. Marvellous it was that
she was not killed outright, for the window was fully
twenty feet from the ground. When the lady made her
perilous leap she was clad only in her shift. Dressed
in this fashion she set herself to follow the knight by
the drops of blood which dripped from his wound. She
went along the road that he had gone before, till she
lighted on a little lodge. This lodge had but one door,
and it was stained with blood. By the marks on the
lintel she knew that Eudemarec had refreshed him in the
hut, but she could not tell whether he was yet within.
The damsel entered in the lodge, but all was dark, and
since she might not find him, she came forth, and pursued
her way. She went so far that at the last the lady
came to a very fair meadow. She followed the track
of blood across this meadow, till she saw a city near at
hand. This fair city was altogether shut in with high
walls. There was no house, nor hall, nor tower, but
shone bright as silver, so rich were the folk who dwelt
therein. Before the town lay a still water. To the right
spread a leafy wood, and on the left hand, near by the
keep, ran a clear river. By this broad stream the ships
drew to their anchorage, for there were above three
hundred lying in the haven. The lady entered in the
city by the postern gate. The gouts of freshly fallen
blood led her through the streets to the castle. None
challenged her entrance to the city; none asked of her
business in the streets; she passed neither man nor
woman upon her way. Spots of red blood lay on the
staircase of the palace. The lady entered and found
herself within a low ceiled room, where a knight was
sleeping on a pallet. She looked upon his face and
passed beyond. She came within a larger room, empty,
save for one lonely couch, and for the knight who slept
thereon. But when the lady entered in the third chamber
she saw a stately bed, that well she knew to be her
friend's. This bed was of inwrought gold, and was
spread with silken cloths beyond price. The furniture
was worth the ransom of a city, and waxen torches in
sconces of silver lighted the chamber, burning night and
day. Swiftly as the lady had come she knew again her
friend, directly she saw him with her eyes. She hastened
to the bed, and incontinently swooned for grief. The
knight clasped her in his arms, bewailing his wretched
lot, but when she came to her mind, he comforted her
as sweetly as he might.</p>

<p>"Fair friend, for God's love I pray you get from
hence as quickly as you are able. My time will end before
the day, and my household, in their wrath, may do you
a mischief if you are found in the castle. They are
persuaded that by reason of your love I have come to
my death. Fair friend, I am right heavy and sorrowful
because of you."</p>

<p>The lady made answer,
"Friend, the best thing that can befall me is that we
shall die together. How may I return to my husband?
If he finds me again he will certainly slay me with the
sword."</p>

<p>The knight consoled her as he could. He bestowed
a ring upon his friend, teaching her that so long as she
wore the gift, her husband would think of none of these
things, nor care for her person, nor seek to revenge him
for his wrongs. Then he took his sword and rendered
it to the lady, conjuring her by their great love, never
to give it to the hand of any, till their son should be
counted a brave and worthy knight. When that time
was come she and her lord would go—together with
the son—to a feast. They would lodge in an Abbey,
where should be seen a very fair tomb. There her son
must be told of this death; there he must be girt
with this sword. In that place shall be rehearsed the
tale of his birth, and his father, and all this bitter
wrong. And then shall be seen what he will do.</p>

<p>When the knight had shown his friend all that was
in his heart, he gave her a bliaut, passing rich, that she
might clothe her body, and get her from the palace.
She went her way, according to his command, bearing
with her the ring, and the sword that was her most
precious treasure. She had not gone half a mile beyond
the gate of the city when she heard the clash of bells,
and the cries of men who lamented the death of their
lord. Her grief was such that she fell four separate
times upon the road, and four times she came from out
her swoon. She bent her steps to the lodge where her
friend had refreshed him, and rested for awhile. Passing
beyond she came at last to her own land, and returned
to her husband's tower. There, for many a day, she
dwelt in peace, since—as Eudemarec foretold—her
lord gave no thought to her outgoings, nor wished to
avenge him, neither spied upon her any more.</p>

<p>In due time the lady was delivered of a son, whom
she named Yonec. Very sweetly nurtured was the lad.
In all the realm there was not his like for beauty and
generosity, nor one more skilled with the spear. When
he was of a fitting age the King dubbed him knight.
Hearken now, what chanced to them all, that self-same
year.</p>

<p>It was the custom of that country to keep the feast
of St. Aaron with great pomp at Caerleon, and many
another town besides. The husband rode with his
friends to observe the festival, as was his wont. Together
with him went his wife and her son, richly
apparelled. As the roads were not known of the company,
and they feared to lose their way, they took with
them a certain youth to lead them in the straight path.
The varlet brought them to a town; in all the world
was none so fair. Within this city was a mighty Abbey,
filled with monks in their holy habit. The varlet craved
a lodging for the night, and the pilgrims were welcomed
gladly of the monks, who gave them meat and drink
near by the Abbot's table. On the morrow, after Mass,
they would have gone their way, but the Abbot prayed
them to tarry for a little, since he would show them his
chapter house and dormitory, and all the offices of the
Abbey. As the Abbot had sheltered them so courteously,
the husband did according to his wish.</p>

<p>Immediately that the dinner had come to an end,
the pilgrims rose from table, and visited the offices of
the Abbey. Coming to the chapter house they entered
therein, and found a fair tomb, exceeding great, covered
with a silken cloth, banded with orfreys of gold. Twenty
torches of wax stood around this rich tomb, at the head,
the foot, and the sides. The candlesticks were of fine
gold, and the censer swung in that chantry was fashioned
from an amethyst. When the pilgrims saw the great
reverence vouchsafed to this tomb, they inquired of
the guardians as to whom it should belong, and of the
lord who lay therein. The monks commenced to weep,
and told with tears, that in that place was laid the body
of the best, the bravest, and the fairest knight who ever
was, or ever should be born. "In his life he was King
of this realm, and never was there so worshipful a lord.
He was slain at Caerwent for the love of a lady of those
parts. Since then the country is without a King. Many
a day have we waited for the son of these luckless lovers
to come to our land, even as our lord commanded us
to do."</p>

<p>When the lady heard these words she cried to her
son with a loud voice before them all.</p>

<p>"Fair son," said she, "you have heard why God
has brought us to this place. It is your father who lies
dead within this tomb. Foully was he slain by this
ancient Judas at your side."</p>

<p>With these words she plucked out the sword, and
tendered him the glaive that she had guarded for so
long a season. As swiftly as she might she told the
tale of how Eudemarec came to have speech with his
friend in the guise of a hawk; how the bird was betrayed
to his death by the jealousy of her lord; and of Yonec
the falcon's son. At the end she fell senseless across
the tomb, neither did she speak any further word until
the soul had gone from her body. When the son saw
that his mother lay dead upon her lover's grave, he
raised his father's sword and smote the head of that
ancient traitor from his shoulders. In that hour he
avenged his father's death, and with the same blow
gave quittance for the wrongs of his mother. As soon
as these tidings were published abroad, the folk of that
city came together, and setting the body of that fair
lady within a coffin, sealed it fast, and with due rite
and worship placed it beside the body of her friend.
May God grant them pardon and peace. As to Yonec,
their son, the people acclaimed him for their lord, as
he departed from the church.</p>

<p>Those who knew the truth of this piteous adventure,
after many days shaped it to a Lay, that all men might
learn the plaint and the dolour that these two friends
suffered by reason of their love.</p>


